"i am not treacherous, callous, jealous, superstitious, 
supercilious, venomous, or absolutely hideous": 
studying and studying its expression, 
exasperated desperation 
though at no real impasse, 
would gladly break the glass; 
when love of order, ardor, uncircuitous simplicity, 
with an expression of inquiry, are all one needs to be! 
certain faces, a few, one or two—or one 
face photographed by recollection— 
to my mind, to my sight, 
must remain a delight. 
with webs of cool 
chain mail and his stout heart, is not the gander 
mocked, and ignorantly designated yet, 
to play the fool? 
"egyptian vultures clean as cherubim, 
all ivory and jet," are they most foul? 
and nature’s child, 
that most precocious water bird, the loon — why 
is he foremost in the madman’s alphabet; 
why is he styled 
in folly’s catalogue, distressful lunatic? 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
the doughy older man in a marine bulldogs jacket 
signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
that's what it takes to get things done, he tells her 
and the rest of the waiting room.if nothing happens, 
you gotta investigate. that's what it means to be a marine. 
yes, lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit, 
her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
credo. yes, lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters 
wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths 
wide, lest we miss our last name/first initial flashed 
upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling. 
this room used to be a participatory democracy. 
now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
we read our patient education leaflets. we wait. 
outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city. 
man looking into the sea, 
taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have to it yourself, 
it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing 
but you cannot stand in the middle of this: 
the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave. 
the firs stand in a procession, each with an emerald turkey-foot at the top, 
reserved as their contours, saying nothing; 
repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea; 
the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look. 
there are others besides you who have worn that look— 
whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them 
for their bones have not lasted: 
men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave, 
and row quickly away—the blades of the oars 
moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death. 
the wrinkles progress upon themselves in a phalanx—beautiful under networks of foam, 
and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed; 
the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting catcalls as heretofore— 
the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them 
and the ocean, under the pulsation of lighthouse and noise of bell-buoys, 
advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink— 
in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness. 
visible, invisible, 
a fluctuating charm 
an amber-tinctured amethyst 
inhabits it, your arm 
approaches and it opens 
and it closes; you had meant 
to catch it and it quivers; 
you abandon your intent. 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
here we have thirst 
and patience from the first, 
and art, as in a wave held up for us to see 
in its essential perpendicularity; 
not brittle but 
intense—the spectrum, that 
spectacular and nimble animal the fish, 
whose scales turn aside the sun’s sword with their polish. 
this is what came before the world 
it was this 
that called the world 
into being 
so much older than what 
we speak now 
it has flowed through 
more of your ancestors 
than any other 
it has flowed within me 
even when i don't understand 
especially then 
i don't really know 
how you 
came into being 
it must have been this 
that called you 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
of ice. deceptively reserved and flat, 
it lies "in grandeur and in mass" 
beneath a sea of shifting snow dunes; 
dots of cyclamen red and maroon on its clearly defined pseudopodia 
made of glass that will bend—a much needed invention— 
comprising twenty-eight ice fields from fifty to five hundred feet thick, 
of unimagined delicacy. 
"picking periwinkles from the cracks" 
or killing prey with the concentric crushing rigor of the python, 
it hovers forward "spider fashion 
on its arms" misleadingly like lace; 
its "ghostly pallor changing 
to the green metallic tinge of an anemone starred pool." 
the fir trees in "the magnitude of their root systems," 
rise aloof from these maneuvers "creepy to behold," 
austere specimens of our american royal families, 
"each like the shadow of the one beside it. 
the rock seems frail compared with their dark energy of life," 
its vermilion and onyx and manganese blue interior expensiveness 
left at the mercy of the weather; 
"stained transversely by iron where the water drips down," 
recognized by its plants and its animals. 
completing a circle, 
you have been deceived into thinking that you have progressed, 
under the polite needles of the larches 
"hung to filter not to intercept the sunlight"— 
met by tightly wattled spruce twigs 
"conformed to an edge like clipped cypress 
as if no branch could penetrate the cold beyond its company"; 
and dumps of gold and silver ore enclosing the goat’s mirror— 
that lady-fingerlike depression in the shape of the left human foot, 
which prejudices you in favor of itself 
before you have had time to see the others; 
its indigo, pea-green, blue-green, and turquoise, 
from a hundred to two hundred feet deep, 
"merging in irregular patches in the middle lake 
where like gusts of a storm 
obliterating the shadows of the fir trees, the wind makes lanes of ripples." 
what spot could have merits of equal importance 
for bears, elk, deer, wolves, goats, and ducks? 
preempted by their ancestors, 
this is the property of the exacting porcupine, 
and of the rat "slipping along to its burrow in the swamp 
or pausing on high ground to smell the heather"; 
of "thoughtful beavers 
making drains which seem the work of careful men with shovels," 
and of the bears inspecting unexpectedly 
ant hills and berry bushes. 
composed of calcium gems and alabaster pillars, 
topaz, tourmaline crystals and amethyst quartz, 
their den is somewhere else, concealed in the confusion 
of "blue forests thrown together with marble and jasper and agate 
as if whole quarries had been dynamited." 
and farther up, in stag-at-bay position 
as a scintillating fragment of these terrible stalagmites, 
stands the goat, 
its eye fixed on the waterfall which never seems to fall— 
an endless skein swayed by the wind, 
immune to force of gravity in the perspective of the peaks. 
a special antelope 
acclimated to "grottoes from which issue penetrating draughts 
which make you wonder why you came," 
it stands its ground 
on cliffs the color of the clouds, of petrified white vapor— 
black feet, eyes, nose, and horns engraved on dazzling ice-fields, 
the ermine body on the crystal peak; 
the sun kindling its shoulders to maximum heat like acetylene, dyeing them white— 
upon this antique pedestal— 
"a mountain with those graceful lines which prove it a volcano," 
its top a complete cone like fujiyama’s 
till an explosion blew it off. 
maintaining many minds, distinguished by a beauty 
of which "the visitor dare never fully speak at home 
for fear of being stoned as an imposter," 
big snow mountain is the home of a diversity of creatures: 
those who "have lived in hotels 
but who now live in camps—who prefer to"; 
the mountain guide evolving from the trapper, 
"in two pairs of trousers, the outer one older, 
wearing slowly away from the feet to the knees"; 
"the nine-striped chipmunk 
running with unmammallike agility along a log"; 
the water ouzel 
with "its passion for rapids and high pressured falls," 
building under the arch of some tiny niagara; 
the white-tailed ptarmigan "in winter solid white, 
feeding on heather bells and alpine buckwheat"; 
and the eleven eagles of the west, 
"fond of the spring fragrance and the winter colors," 
used to the unegoistic action of the glaciers 
and "several hours of frost every midsummer night." 
"they make a nice appearance, don’t they," 
happy seeing nothing? 
perched on treacherous lava and pumice— 
those unadjusted chimney-pots and cleavers 
which stipulate "the names and addresses of persons to notify 
in case of disaster—" 
they hear the roar of ice and supervise the water 
winding slowly through the cliffs, 
the road "climbing like the thread 
which forms the groove around a snail-shell, 
doubling back and forth until where snow begins, it ends." 
no "deliberate wide-eyed wistfulness" is here 
among the boulders sunk in ripples and white water 
where "when you hear the best wild music of the mountains it is sure to be a marmot," 
the victim on some slight observatory, 
of "a struggle between curiosity and caution," 
inquiring what has scared it: 
a stone from the moraine descending in leaps, 
another marmot, or the spotted ponies with "glass eyes," 
brought up on frosty grass and flowers 
and rapid draughts of ice water. 
instructed none knows how, to climb the mountain, 
by "business men who as totemic scenery of canada, 
require for recreation, 
three hundred and sixty-five holidays in the year," 
these conspicuously spotted little horses are peculiar; 
hard to discern among the birch trees, ferns, and lily pads, 
avalanche lilies, indian paintbrushes, 
bears’ ears and kittentails, 
and miniature cavalcades of chlorophylless fungi 
magnified in profile on the moss beds like moonstones in the water; 
the cavalcade of calico competing 
with the original american "menagerie of styles" 
among the white flowers of the rhododendron surmounting rigid leaves 
upon which moisture works its alchemy, 
transmuting verdure into onyx. 
larkspur, blue pincushions, blue peas, and lupin; 
white flowers with white, and red with red; 
the blue ones "growing close together 
so that patches of them look like blue water in the distance": 
this arrangement of colors 
as in persian designs of hard stones with enamel, 
forms a pleasing equation— 
a diamond outside and inside, a white dot; 
on the outside, a ruby; inside, a red dot; 
black spots balanced with black 
in the woodlands where fires have run over the ground— 
separated by aspens, cat’s paws, and woolly sunflowers, 
fireweed, asters, and goliath thistles 
"flowering at all altitudes as multiplicitous as barley," 
like pink sapphires in the pavement of the glistening plateau. 
inimical to "bristling, puny, swearing men 
equipped with saws and axes," 
this treacherous glass mountain 
admires gentians, lady’s slippers, harebells, mountain dryads, 
and "calypso, the goat flower— 
that greenish orchid fond of snow"— 
anomalously nourished upon shelving glacial ledges 
where climbers have not gone or have gone timidly, 
"the one resting his nerves while the other advanced," 
on this volcano with the blue jay, her principal companion. 
"hopping stiffly on sharp feet" like miniature icehacks— 
"secretive, with a look of wisdom and distinction, but a villain, 
fond of human society or the crumbs that go with it," 
he knows no greek, 
"that pride producing language," 
in which "rashness is rendered innocuous, and error exposed 
by the collision of knowledge with knowledge." 
"like happy souls in hell," enjoying mental difficulties, 
the grasshoppers of greece 
amused themselves with delicate behavior 
because it was "so noble and so fair"; 
not practiced in adapting their intelligence 
to eagle traps and snowshoes, 
to alpenstocks and other toys contrived by those 
"alive to the advantage of invigorating pleasures." 
bows, arrows, oars, and paddles for which trees provide the wood, 
in new countries are more eloquent than elsewhere— 
augmenting evidence for the assertion 
that essentially humane, 
"the forest affords wood for dwellings and by its beauty stimulates 
the moral vigor of its citizens." 
the greeks liked smoothness, distrusting what was back 
of what could not be clearly seen, 
resolving with benevolent conclusiveness, 
"complexities which still will be complexities 
as long as the world lasts"; 
ascribing what we clumsily call happiness, 
to "an accident or a quality, 
a spiritual substance or the soul itself, 
an act, a disposition, or a habit, 
or a habit infused to which the soul has been persuaded, 
or something distinct from a habit, a power—" 
such power as adam had and we are still devoid of. 
"emotionally sensitive, their hearts were hard"; 
their wisdom was remote 
from that of these odd oracles of cool official sarcasm, 
upon this game preserve 
where "guns, nets, seines, traps and explosives, 
hired vehicles, gambling and intoxicants are prohibited, 
disobedient persons being summarily removed 
and not allowed to return without permission in writing." 
it is self evident 
that it is frightful to have everything afraid of one; 
that one must do as one is told 
and eat "rice, prunes, dates, raisins, hardtack, and tomatoes" 
if one would "conquer the main peak" of mount tacoma 
this fossil flower concise without a shiver, 
intact when it is cut, 
damned for its sacrosanct remoteness— 
like henry james "damned by the public for decorum"; 
not decorum, but restraint; 
it was the love of doing hard things 
that rebuffed and wore them out—a public out of sympathy with neatness. 
neatness of finish! neatness of finish! 
relentless accuracy is the nature of this octopus 
with its capacity for fact. 
"creeping slowly as with meditated stealth, 
its arms seeming to approach from all directions," 
it receives one under winds that "tear the snow to bits 
and hurl it like a sandblast, 
shearing off twigs and loose bark from the trees." 
is tree the word for these strange things 
"flat on the ground like vines"; 
some "bent in a half circle with branches on one side 
suggesting dustbrushes, not trees; 
some finding strength in union, forming little stunted groves, 
their flattened mats of branches shrunk in trying to escape" 
from the hard mountain "planed by ice and polished by the wind"— 
the white volcano with no weather side; 
the lightning flashing at its base, 
rain falling in the valleys, and snow falling on the peak— 
the glassy octopus symmetrically pointed, 
its claw cut by the avalanche 
"with a sound like the crack of a rifle, 
in a curtain of powdered snow launched like a waterfall. 
partaking of the miraculous 
since never known literally, 
dürer’s rhinoceros 
might have startled us equally 
if black-and-white-spined elaborately. 
like another porcupine, or fern, 
the mouth in an arching egret 
was too black to discern 
till exposed as a silhouette; 
but the double-embattled thistle of jet— 
disadvantageous supposedly— 
has never shot a quill. was it 
some joyous fantasy, 
plain eider-eared exhibit 
of spines rooted in the sooty moss, 
or "train supported by porcupines— 
a fairy’s eleven yards long"? … 
as when the lightning shines 
on thistlefine spears, among 
prongs in lanes above lanes of a shorter prong, 
"with the forest for nurse," also dark 
at the base—where needle-debris 
springs and shows no footmark; 
the setting for a symmetry 
you must not touch unless you are a fairy. 
maine should be pleased that its animal 
is not a waverer, and rather 
than fight, lets the primed quill fall. 
shallow oppressor, intruder, 
insister, you have found a resister. 
fragments of sin are a part of me. 
new brooms shall sweep clean the heart of me. 
shall they? shall they? 
when this light life shall have passed away, 
god shall redeem me, a castaway. 
shall he? shall he? 
you wake hearing the girl next door come in at two a.m. 
in the event that it's a ghost, it's telling you 
not to waste time in bed 
worrying. 
you should be sleeping, or doing 
anything else. 
you haven't yet seen the faun, the red fox, 
or the rabbit. 
the statue of a woman in the lily-padded lake is waist-deep, 
a mimicry of diana's animal life, suspicious of sleep. 
with her in mind, you're troubled even thinking of things 
that don't frighten you. 
but this, too, is a waste of time and talent. 
there is good slumber 
to be sought in the rush of ruminations outside yourself: 
in listlessness of reeds on the dead embankment, 
in languor of bee by a late marigold 
or duck feathers gathering in a corner of falling 
water. 
you realize you haven't organized your life. 
you've forgotten yourself entirely. 
you wake up and try to pick up the thread. 
come in, rat, and eat with me; 
one must occasionally— 
if one would rate the rat at his true worth— 
practice catholicity. 
cheeseparings and a porkrind 
stock my house—good of their kind 
but were they not, you would oblige me? is 
plenty, multiplicity? 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
at first i thought a pest 
must have alighted on my wrist. 
it was a moth almost an owl, 
its wings were furred so well, 
with backgammon-board wedges interlacing 
on the wing— 
like cloth of gold in a pattern 
of scales with a hair-seal persian 
sheen. once, self-determination 
made an axe of a stone 
and hacked things out with hairy paws. the consequence—our mis-set 
alphabet. 
arise, for it is day. 
even gifted scholars lose their way 
through faulty etymology. 
no wonder we hate poetry, 
and stars and harps and the new moon. if tributes cannot 
be implicit, 
give me diatribes and the fragrance of iodine, 
the cork oak acorn grown in spain; 
the pale-ale-eyed impersonal look 
which the sales-placard gives the bock beer buck. 
what is more precise than precision? illusion. 
knights we’ve known, 
like those familiar 
now unfamiliar knights who sought the grail, were 
ducs in old roman fashion 
without the addition 
of wreaths and silver rods, and armor gilded 
or inlaid. 
they did not let self bar 
their usefulness to others who were 
different. though mars is excessive 
is being preventive, 
heroes need not write an ordinall of attributes to enumerate 
what they hate. 
i should, i confess, 
like to have a talk with one of them about excess, 
and armor’s undermining modesty 
instead of innocent depravity. 
a mirror-of-steel uninsistence should countenance 
continence, 
objectified and not by chance, 
there in its frame of circumstance 
of innocence and altitude 
in an unhackneyed solitude. 
there is the tarnish; and there, the imperishable wish. 
slim dragonfly 
too rapid for the eye 
to cage— 
contagious gem of virtuosity— 
make visible, mentality. 
your jewels of mobility 
reveal 
and veil 
a peacock-tail 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
under a splintered mast, 
torn from the ship and cast 
near her hull, 
a stumbling shepherd found 
embedded in the ground, 
a seagull 
of lapis lazuli, 
a scarab of the sea, 
with wings spread— 
curling its coral feet, 
parting its beak to greet 
men long dead. 
i was sitting in the car counting the black flies 
they had come in through the open window 
there were four 
one was on the rear-view mirror 
the other three were perched on my left hand 
i heard a gunshot by the barn and thought nothing of it 
we were at a farm 
i saw a cow come charging forward with its head half gone 
a man with an axe came running behind it 
he hit it once 
once he hit it 
and it fell to the ground 
everything was eaten 
its eye appeared in a soup that night 
everything accounted for 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
i've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
your eyes open the night's slow static. at a loss 
to understand all that i cannot say, as if you came 
upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
if i moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
will return to me what i lost learning to speak. 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
as long as you hold me i am doubled from without and within: 
a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
i will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once i see 
your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
broken on a shore of cedar. we twist in a wake of fog. 
stars originate from 
the same place as bells 
what should i be thinking about? 
apparently may 6th 
is world naked gardening day 
if a school were a uterus 
someone writes 
the politicians would protect 
the children inside 
a cupped hand 
a mouthful of water 
snowball the shape of a hand 
after 9/11 i remember writing 
something sarcastic 
intended to be zen 
a poem about not being able to find a sock 
i pissed off the poet 
george murray 
but i realize it's true 
anytime i've lost a sock 
someone's being shot 
even when i haven't lost one 
once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
to the lake 
tashlich: dropping bread into water 
casting off sins 
why am i doing this 
my son said don't believe in it 
what about making the world better? 
the rabbi asked 
yes my son said yes 
my son and i 
late autumn 
walking under the golden leaves 
on my desk 
a stapler, paperclips, some books 
laptop open to american news 
biscuit factory 
send my regards to the paris streets, the poet wrote * 
from exile in america. i will do the same to the room 
on alma, close to the eiffel tower, 
where i stayed with jeannie, from alaska, 
and her turkish friend, hanife. 
one room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
a toilet near the stair. while a man unlocked the door 
and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
into the foyer. the night of my 24thbirthday, 
the cards predicted disaster before i unfastened my handbag 
in the restaurant, to pay. someone had stolen my wallet 
and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
long distance for free. i lined up behind moroccans and turks, 
and phoned my mother at work where a kwakiutl sun 
blazed on the wall behind her. at lunchtime 
she went to the bank in her red high heels, 
and sent me money. why else am i here, 
but to wander until i remember 
with innocent wide penguin eyes, three 
grown fledgling mocking-birds below 
the pussy-willow tree, 
stand in a row, 
wings touching, feebly solemn, 
till they see 
their no longer larger 
mother bringing 
something which will partially 
feed one of them. 
towards the high-keyed intermittent squeak 
of broken carriage-springs, made by 
the three similar, meek- 
coated bird’s-eye 
freckled forms she comes; and when 
from the beak 
of one, the still living 
beetle has dropped 
out, she picks it up and puts 
it in again. 
standing in the shade till they have dressed 
their thickly-filamented, pale 
pussy-willow-surfaced 
coats, they spread tail 
and wings, showing one by one, 
the modest 
white stripe lengthwise on the 
tail and crosswise 
on the under wing, and the 
accordion 
is closed again. what delightful note 
with rapid unexpected flute- 
sounds leaping from the throat 
of the astute 
grown bird comes back to one from 
the remote 
unenergetic sun- 
lit air before 
the brood was here? why has the 
bird’s voice become 
harsh? a piebald cat observing them, 
is slowly creeping toward the trim 
trio on the tree-stem. 
unused to him 
the three make room—uneasy 
new problem. 
a dangling foot that missed 
its grasp, is raised 
and finds the twig on which it 
planned to perch. the 
parent darting down, nerved by what chills 
the blood, and by hope rewarded— 
of toil—since nothing fills 
squeaking unfed 
mouths, wages deadly combat, 
and half kills 
with bayonet beak and 
cruel wings, the 
intellectual, cautious- 
l y c r e e p i n g c a t. 
near where my father worked in victoria? 
thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
where condos now simper. my father climbed 
to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
to document gauges. we drove up in the chevy, 
to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted 
peter pan dress and stockings. he gave us treats— 
nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
and then my brother and i climbed up the side of the vats 
as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
and noticed us. you know, the condos there now, 
where the oil tanks were, 
and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage, 
are nothing to what happened to the girls 
i thought were my friends, and me. 
we lined up at dior in paris with the models, 
and went in. our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents. 
openly, yes, 
with the naturalness 
of the hippopotamus or the alligator 
when it climbs out on the bank to experience the 
sun, i do these 
things which i do, which please 
no one but myself. now i breathe and now i am submerged; 
the blemishes stand up and shout when the object 
in view was a 
renaissance; shall i say 
the contrary? the sediment of the river which 
encrusts my joints, makes me very gray but i am used 
to it, it may 
remain there; do away 
with it and i am myself done away with, for the 
patina of circumstance can but enrich what was 
there to begin 
with. this elephant skin 
which i inhabit, fibered over like the shell of 
the coconut, this piece of black glass through which no light 
can filter—cut 
into checkers by rut 
upon rut of unpreventable experience— 
it is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the 
hairy toed. black 
but beautiful, my back 
is full of the history of power. of power? what 
is powerful and what is not? my soul shall never 
be cut into 
by a wooden spear; throughout 
childhood to the present time, the unity of 
life and death has been expressed by the circumference 
described by my 
trunk; nevertheless, i 
perceive feats of strength to be inexplicable after 
all; and i am on my guard; external poise, it 
has its center 
well nurtured—we know 
where—in pride, but spiritual poise, it has its center where? 
my ears are sensitized to more than the sound of 
the wind. i see 
and i hear, unlike the 
wandlike body of which one hears so much, which was made 
to see and not to see; to hear and not to hear; 
that tree trunk without 
roots, accustomed to shout 
its own thoughts to itself like a shell, maintained intact 
by one who knows what strange pressure of the atmosphere; that 
spiritual 
brother to the coral 
plant, absorbed into which, the equable sapphire light 
becomes a nebulous green. the i of each is to 
the i of each, 
a kind of fretful speech 
which sets a limit on itself; the elephant is? 
black earth preceded by a tendril? it is to that 
phenomenon 
the above formation, 
translucent like the atmosphere—a cortex merely— 
that on which darts cannot strike decisively the first 
time, a substance 
needful as an instance 
of the indestructibility of matter; it 
has looked at the electricity and at the earth- 
quake and is still 
here; the name means thick. will 
depth be depth, thick skin be thick, to one who can see no 
beautiful element of unreason under it? 
in this camera shot, 
from that fine print in which you hide 
(eight-pony portrait from the side), 
you seem to recognize 
a recognizing eye, 
limber bug. 
only partly said, perhaps, it has been implied 
that you seem to be the one to ride. 
i don’t know how you got your name 
and don’t like to inquire. 
nothing more punitive than the pest 
who says, "i’m trespassing," and 
does it just the same. 
i’ve guessed, i think. 
i like a face that seems a nest, 
a "mere container for the eye"— 
triangle-cornered—and 
pitchfork-pronged ears stiffly parallel: 
bug brother to an arthur 
mitchell dragonfly, 
speeding to left, 
speeding to right; reversible, 
like "turns in an ancient chinese 
melody, a thirteen 
twisted silk-string three-finger solo." 
there they are, yellow riverscroll 
accuracies 
of your version 
of something similar—polo. 
restating it: 
pelo, i turn, 
on polos, a pivot. 
if a little elaborate, 
redon (odilon) brought it to mind, 
his thought of the eye, 
of revolving—combined somehow with pastime— 
pastime that is work, 
muscular docility, 
also mentality, 
as in the acrobat li siau than, 
gibbonlike but limberer, 
defying gravity, 
nether side arched up, 
cup on head not upset— 
china’s very most ingenious man. 
on the green 
with lignum vitae balls and ivory markers, 
the pins planted in wild duck formation, 
and quickly dispersed: 
by this survival of ancient punctilio 
in the manner of chinese lacquer carving, 
layer after layer exposed by certainty of touch and unhurried incision 
so that only so much color shall be revealed as is necessary to the picture 
i learn that we are precisians— 
not citizens of pompeii arrested in action 
as a cross section of one’s correspondence would seem to imply. 
renouncing a policy of boorish indifference 
to everything that has been said since the days of matilda, 
i shall purchase an etymological dictionary of modern english 
that i may understand what is written 
and like the ant and the spider 
returning from time to time to headquarters, 
shall answer the question 
as to "why i like winter better than i like summer" 
and acknowledge that it does not make me sick 
to look modern playwrights and poets and novelists straight in the face— 
that i feel just the same; 
and i shall write to the publisher of the magazine 
which will "appear the first day of the month 
and disappear before one has had time to buy it 
unless one takes proper precaution," 
and make an effort to please— 
since he who gives quickly gives twice 
in nothing so much as in a letter. 
affirmed. pent by power that holds it fast— 
a paradox. pent. hard pressed, 
you take the blame and are inviolate. 
abased at last; 
not the tempest-tossed. 
compressed; firmed by the thrust of the blast 
till compact, like a bulwark against fate; 
lead-saluted, 
saluted by lead? 
as though flying old glory full mast. 
messengers much like ourselves? explain it. 
steadfastness the darkness makes explicit? 
something heard most clearly when not near it? 
above particularities, 
these unparticularities praise cannot violate. 
one has seen, in such steadiness never deflected, 
how by darkness a star is perfected. 
star that does not ask me if i see it? 
fir that would not wish me to uproot it? 
speech that does not ask me if i hear it? 
mysteries expound mysteries. 
steadier than steady, star dazzling me, live and elate, 
no need to say, how like some we have known; too like her, 
too like him, and a-quiver forever. 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
(late-fifteenth-century tapestry, flemish or french, in the burrell collection, glasgow art gallery and museum) 
have you time for a story 
(depicted in tapestry)? 
charity, riding an elephant, 
on a "mosaic of flowers," faces envy, 
the flowers "bunched together, not rooted." 
envy, on a dog, is worn down by obsession, 
his greed (since of things owned by others 
he can only take some). crouching uneasily 
in the flowered filigree, among wide weeds 
indented by scallops that swirl, 
little flattened-out sunflowers, 
thin arched coral stems, and—ribbed horizontally— 
slivers of green, envy, on his dog, 
looks up at the elephant, 
cowering away from her, his cheek scarcely scratched. 
he is saying, "o charity, pity me, deity! 
o pitiless destiny, 
what will become of me, 
maimed by charity—caritas—sword unsheathed 
over me yet? blood stains my cheek. i am hurt." 
in chest armor over chain mail, a steel shirt 
to the knee, he repeats, "i am hurt." 
the elephant, at no time borne down by self-pity, 
convinces the victim 
that destiny is not devising a plot. 
the problem is mastered—insupportably 
tiring when it was impending. 
deliverance accounts for what sounds like an axiom. 
the gordian knot need not be cut. 
one likes to see a laggard rook’s high 
speed at sunset to outfly the dark, 
or a mount well schooled for a medal— 
front legs tucked under for the barrier, 
or team of leapers turned aerial. 
i recall a documentary 
of cossacks: a visual fugue, a mist 
of swords that seemed to sever 
heads from bodies—feet stepping as through 
harp-strings in a scherzo. however, 
the quadrille of old russia for me: 
with aimlessly drooping handkerchief 
snapped like the crack of a whip; 
a deliriously spun-out-level 
frock-coat skirt, unswirled and a-droop 
in remote promenade. let me see … 
old russia, did i say? cold russia 
this time: the prize bunnyhug 
and platform-piece of experts in the 
trip-and-slug of wrestlers in a rug. 
"sacked" and ready for bed apparently— 
with a jab, a kick, pinned to the wall, 
they work toward the edge and stick; 
stagger off, and one is victim of a 
flipflop—leg having circled leg as thick. 
some art, because of high quality, 
is unlikely to command high sales; 
yes, no doubt; but here, oh no; 
not with the frozen north’s nan-ai-ans 
of the sack in their tight touch-and-go. 
these battlers, dressed identically— 
just one person—may, by seeming twins, 
point a moral, should i confess; 
we must cement the parts of any 
objective symbolic of sagesse. 
blue bug 
said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you 
that he might know you from the internet. you didn't 
remember who he was, not even when he called you 
by your fake name. all you thought was, "i can't 
do this again. i want to be clean. i want to be shazia." 
if you end this poem here, it might make sense, 
but we both know this kind of work is occult. 
so, you have to ask me: how do you want to finish 
this poem? you have to leave it there. that way 
at least it's not about you anymore. 
the translation for joy 
in cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
the translation for bittersweet in cree 
looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
eight decades too late 
the translation for patience 
in cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children 
and two of her sister's 
the translation for evil 
in cree is the act of not calling 
your mother on a sunday 
the translation for expedition 
in cree is travelling 20 minutes 
to the only gas station in faust, alberta 
to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
the translation for success in cree 
is executing the perfect frog splash 
on your younger brother 
the cree word for white man is unpaid child support 
the translation for conflicted in cree 
is your deep, steadfast love 
for country superstar 
dwight yoakam (or depending on 
the regional dialect, 
george jones, patsy cline 
or blue rodeo) 
the cree word for constellation 
is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
the translation for policeman 
in cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
the translation for genius 
in cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep 
the cree word for poetry is your four-year-old 
niece's cracked lips spilling out 
broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between 
the gaps in her teeth 
there is a great amount of poetry in unconscious 
fastidiousness. certain ming 
products, imperial floor coverings of coach wheel yellow, are well enough in their way but i have seen something 
that i like better—a 
mere childish attempt to make an imperfectly ballasted animal stand up, 
similar determination to make a pup 
eat his meat on the plate. 
i remember a swan under the willows in oxford 
with flamingo colored, maple- 
leaflike feet. it reconnoitered like a battle ship. disbelief and conscious fastidiousness were the staple 
ingredients in its 
disinclination to move. finally its hardihood was not proof against its 
proclivity to more fully appraise such bits 
of food as the stream 
bore counter to it; it made away with what i gave it 
to eat. i have seen this swan and 
i have seen you; i have seen ambition without understanding in a variety of forms. happening to stand 
by an ant hill, i have 
seen a fastidious ant carrying a stick, north, south, east, west, till it turned on 
itself, struck out from the flower bed into the lawn, 
and returned to the point 
from which it had started. then abandoning the stick as 
useless and overtaxing its 
jaws with a particle of whitewash pill-like but heavy, it again went through the same course of procedure. what is 
there in being able 
to say that one has dominated the stream in an attitude of self defense, 
in proving that one has had the experience 
of carrying a stick? 
b clicks fistfuls of amethysts. b is six. earlier this week, 
in an agassiz campground, she held a tiny 
abandoned rabbit. watership down, 
but with ravers, 
fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, edm 
and bike lights, b's mother gripping 
capsules stuffed 
with crystals 
in her fist. i tell my mother i never want kids. my mother teaches 
motherhood in ontario woods, leads la leche league, 
squirrels worn-out clothes 
for quilts to send 
overseas. my blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy. 
these years as b's nanny, her nature scraping 
against my nurture. 
her mother 
couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected 
t cells, says she sometimes senses this 
distance. what bits of 
my mother 
insist in me? to what do i affix our distance? the burr thicket of it, 
sticky. the body's crystal arithmetic. b gives me 
an amethyst, tells me how 
the rabbit's heart 
beat beneath her fingertips. 
i'm staring at shakespeare's poem. blocked. carnage because black was not counted fairly. torn into faithless weather because literature assured black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. the critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. informed since i could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of english, i've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of english thinking. the foreign anguish, language! with art's facelessness i borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. shame on who? shame on who? i'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. sometimes you see yourself profaned. sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? somebody doesn't. this situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if i don't bring work home. i'm churning through shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. my children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. they are with me always, as i fail at ease. they don't exist, as i cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard. 
the stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. you fill out index cards. press buttons. feel buoyed by laughter and attention. 
a question goes up on the board. you're in it to win it. you're not here to make friends. "what is—the reason she says she drinks." (yay, points!) 
"what is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
(points!)(points!)(points!) 
mom says, "i'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
she sweeps the board. (applause! cries!) 
it doesn't matter. you're pretty sure you're ahead. 
you're in the bonus round. you take turns. one person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. the audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming. 
with an elephant to ride upon — "with rings on her fingers and bells on her toes," 
she shall outdistance calamity anywhere she goes. 
speed is not in her mind inseparable from carpets. locomotion arose 
in the shape of an elephant; she clambered up and chose 
to travel laboriously. so far as magic carpets are concerned, she knows 
that although the semblance of speed may attach to scarecrows 
of aesthetic procedure, the substance of it is embodied in such of those 
tough-grained animals as have outstripped man’s whim to suppose 
them ephemera, and have earned that fruit of their ability to endure blows, 
which dubs them prosaic necessities—not curios. 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
i could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
doing the death we call pretty. instead, i lord 
a little over people parking, coming & goingremark silent 
on body language—what gait is revealing— 
while i wait by the printer for a report 
i don't even need. the chore, it let me remember 
the world, free & flowing. on the hospital elevator 
this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman 
w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children. 
a young, halfway-pregnant couple. a womanmy mother's shape 
in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic. 
a surgeon'scrocs streaked w/purple-brown blood. 
jackson pollock.in the caf, a man tosses fries 
into his mouth for breakfast,his entire head & eyes 
bandaged up, white & soft as a q-tip. vision 
is my drug. i can't tell if it's working, b/c how 
did my life become a sequence of how do i kill 
the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
when is someone going to finally turnto me & say, 
all this time,what have you been doing? 
it will be an accusation, & a mercy. 
don 
don coles died today. today, katie, 
a student i taught, published her first 
book. i think of my teacher, mike, who don 
taught, and i think of all the lessons that 
don must have taught me through mike, all 
mike taught katie through me. i think of 
the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
cupped hands passing this water, without 
breaks, into another cupped pair. i'm amazed 
at how much we can drink and still have more 
to share. i think of all i learned from katie 
just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
the first poem in her first book, and i am 
amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
rush back through me to mike to don, 
another tributary in this miracle river 
that flows in both directions at once. it dawns 
on me how amazing it is that i can be a river 
at the same time that i'm a man underground, 
breaking down on a train, at the same time 
that i'm a ceaseless pen, that i'm blurred words 
clarified through tears, that i'm ink that dreams  it's 
elgin county 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
flattering 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
fuji, baby 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
how soon, how likely, how severe 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
kill poem 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
letter to atleo from the old shell station near buckhorn 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
the lipstick effect 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
marketplace 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
my mother gave me 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
nancy creek: end of summer 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
o sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
ode to the cockroach 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
transition 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
tu me manques 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
under construction 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
union station 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
witch hunt 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 
racter poems 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
uninhabited 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
injun 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
omnivore 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
on day and night (james arthur) 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
the sympathy of angels 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
a local history 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
love is a moontime teaching 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
mornings with the one glove 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
feel happier in nine seconds 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
water glass 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
african evening 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
homecoming 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
happiness is not the only happiness 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
ideal world 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
if you see it what is it you see 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
the myth of orpheus 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
the meaning of life 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
the ship 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
part of the main 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
iain lachlan campbell 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
et in arcadia ego 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
the fifth season 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
funny 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
victoria soto 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
harvest moon lantern festival 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
pastorals in the atrium 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
self storage 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
repose 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
pender and hamilton 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
little voice 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
amygdala 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
anniversary 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
there must be a name for this 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
terra nova, terraformed 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
look book 
over there on the green 
lawn under a sick pine 
is the body of the bird 
his plumage blue when 
i go to look at him and 
wonder if he's dead but 
his chest sort of heaves 
so i bend down closer 
look how the breast 
of the bird splits open 
and a fist of maggots 
spills out on the grass 
a necklace of sticky 
pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
and shining in the july 
light invertebrates that 
form an anecdote before 
i go back into our clapboard 
house to look at the sears 
catalogue and dream 
i am a girl posed into 
happiness look at me 
here now in this new 
dress i've bought with my 
own money at age twenty 
in the city when the cops 
question me i flash my 
passport thinking of 
lichen inching down 
a branch of a tree over 
the town river when i was 
small and somewhere my 
birth father is drunk and 
homeless, half-mad when 
the cops ask for his name 
he'll say, december 
beauty 
beauty is my irreparable and today i became geometric. 
a faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of first principles. 
in a whiteout of atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
vein of euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
surrounded me. i genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father's jaundice, for i am a good daughter of the colony. 
the colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
i should service or else receive a lesser dessert. with my smudge 
cleanse at the ready i find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
to time, or i'm out of it, entirely. chanting hell as hair veils 
my face as if this is a western. come polygon and i circumvent 
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. holy i went, holy 
all around my head, the holy i am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. striated by the pinnacle 
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
of its gravity. you can scan the ground from overhead for death 
pits. i read this on the internet when i was dehydrated, lonely, 
and afraid. office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition's patent heart. i've gone and been abominable. 
a column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
at the edges of my system an anishinabek or indo-european 
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
space of animal magnetism. white pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. oh, inconsequent curb 
of my street i refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
charged with trafficking. still waiting to be ordained, i make 
mask of our features that are retreating. plush pockets of rust 
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. i've gone 
and got a blister. that summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
porch. a half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. so i continue 
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where i am only just alive. 
bozo, today is over. 
a wake 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
i've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
your eyes open the night's slow static. at a loss 
to understand all that i cannot say, as if you came 
upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
if i moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
will return to me what i lost learning to speak. 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
as long as you hold me i am doubled from without and within: 
a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
i will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once i see 
your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
broken on a shore of cedar. we twist in a wake of fog. 
self-portrait cemetery 
there was no precedent 
just a headache, despair, three 
cans of asahi plastic-bagged and 
there they were: 
most punched into the earth like 
square stud earrings, 
the rest pushed out, erect, 
fake flowers at their base the most 
colourful pubic hair. 
one grave said lagos, nigeria so i stood 
by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
of my hand. 
i was the only live body around. 
they moved my friends 
into the chicken coop. 
and where are the chickens? 
i wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
and i wished for the donkeys— 
i wished something very large for the donkeys. 
i am a donkey. 
there was ginger ale, coke zero, 
and mexican beer 
on the small cart of the small donkey. 
the large and 
heavy head of a 
donkey 
covered in several burlap sacks. 
nausicaa 
she remembers only her dreaming. refashions herself 
in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
changed and replaced it before she woke. i, too, am at 
her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
part of the dream. she cannot see me lying waterlogged 
on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
walks by. it doesn't matter what i am. there is a certain 
pleasure in that. 
killarnoe 
killarnoe is a place i invented right 
now. i just built it from my head. i started 
with a letter k and set down the letters 
that spilled out. what does that say when k-i-l-l 
first sprouts? something repressed, or 
an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
free reign, opens to its own mind 
and speaks bluntly? but see how i persisted 
past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
and a silent e watching without judgement. 
killarnoe, i decide, is the land 
of our ancient people. 
ah 
an open moment, 
a prolonging 
of notice 
without reaction, a downward 
fountain of data, filling. 
unclosing, throat's 
wholeness, wide, 
to swallow 
the thrall of all of it: 
full bulge of gulp 
held— 
nothing undulating, no 
void vacuum 
pursuing a present cud 
through 
a human tunnel. 
sustained hum, 
sustenance 
pouring, not pulsing. 
rinse without erosion, 
flush without the closed 
push of peristalsis. 
clarity 
not needing blur 
to know itself. 
armadillo 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
i am in love with your brother 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
the masturbating flowers 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
the pinata 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
the internet 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
foley artist 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
voodoo hypothesis 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
keepers of paradise 
this is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
this is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
the river that runs from eden mouth 
to rare unsweetened mouth. 
i've logged the sour dawns of all 
my quiet into this body, 
its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
and reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
in the morse events of smallest things 
in my new metropolis away. 
i am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
call me isobar. distraction in place of earth. 
call me tropical depression 
where i regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
i'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
but enough. hear morne d'or divinize her song. 
give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom. 
don draper 
moths feather your far gazebo 
like young sailors on first leave. 
you know something, and keep reminding me 
of my own needs. you see an audience 
of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
and act accordingly. the swallows see it at five o'clock, 
a wolfman's tragedy. 
they hang themselves upside down, 
handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
swayed by a summer night, i swing out 
to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
a bird about-face. you're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 
poseurs 
the walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
moths, with brown wings the prize of 
asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
that peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
would come down from the morello cherry long after sunset; 
after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
for some caliph's odalisque 
or the low-stress oregonian monkey puzzles, 
a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
propose new kinds of orgasm. 
walking stick insects 
were squibs from the natural world, 
little stand-up comics 
fashioned after mutineered twigs. given half a chance, 
the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
wordsworth or nietzsche. like the wives of 17th century 
men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
dividing their time between joy and sloth. 
stranger 
a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
moths feather your far gazebo 
like young sailors on first leave. 
you know something, and keep reminding me 
of my own needs. you see an audience 
of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
and act accordingly. the swallows see it at five o'clock, 
a wolfman's tragedy. 
they hang themselves upside down, 
handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
swayed by a summer night, i swing out 
to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
a bird about-face. you're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 
uplifted and waved until immobilized 
wistarialike, the opposing opposed 
mouse-gray twined proboscises’ trunk formed by two 
trunks, fights itself to a spiraled inter-nosed 
deadlock of dyke-enforced massiveness. it’s a 
knock-down drag-out fight that asks no quarter? just 
a pastime, as when the trunk rains on itself 
the pool it siphoned up; or when—since each must 
provide his forty-pound bough dinner—he broke 
the leafy branches. these templars of the tooth, 
these matched intensities, take master care of 
master tools. one, sleeping with the calm of youth, 
at full length in the half dry sun-flecked stream-bed, 
rests his hunting-horn-curled trunk on shallowed stone. 
the sloping hollow of the sleeper’s body 
cradles the gently breathing eminence’s prone 
mahout, asleep like a lifeless six-foot 
frog, so feather light the elephant’s stiff 
ear’s unconscious of the crossed feet’s weight. and the 
defenseless human thing sleeps as sound as if 
incised with hard wrinkles, embossed with wide ears, 
invincibly tusked, made safe by magic hairs! 
as if, as if, it is all ifs; we are at 
much unease. but magic’s masterpiece is theirs,— 
houdini’s serenity quelling his fears. 
elephant ear-witnesses-to-be of hymns 
and glorias, these ministrants all gray or 
gray with white on legs or trunk, are a pilgrims’ 
pattern of revery not reverence,—a 
religious procession without any priests, 
the centuries-old carefullest unrehearsed 
play. blessed by buddha’s tooth, the obedient beasts 
themselves as toothed temples blessing the street, see 
the white elephant carry the cushion that 
carries the casket that carries the tooth. 
amenable to what, matched with him, are gnat 
trustees, he does not step on them as the white- 
canopied blue-cushioned tooth is augustly 
and slowly returned to the shrine. though white is 
the color of worship and of mourning, he 
is not here to worship and he is too wise 
to mourn,—a life-prisoner but reconciled. 
with trunk tucked up compactly—the elephant’s 
sign of defeat—he resisted, but is the child 
of reason now. his straight trunk seems to say: when 
what we hoped for came to nothing, we revived. 
as loss could not ever alter socrates’ 
tranquillity, the elephant has contrived 
equanimity. with the socrates of 
animals as with sophocles the bee, on whose 
tombstone a hive was incised, sweetness tinctures 
his gravity. his held up fore-leg for use 
as a stair, to be climbed or descended with 
the aid of his ear, expounds the brotherhood 
of creatures to man the encroacher by the 
small word with the dot, meaning know,—the verb bd. 
these knowers, these distinct rememberers 
like bu˙ d, of what they have experienced, are 
"unable to pierce by one dart from the bow 
four plaintain-leaves laid at the points of a square"; 
and cannot, like buddha, change missiles to wreaths, 
alter their shape, bisect hairs in the dark, make 
their wisdom apparent in rays of all hues, 
or turn heat, exasperated, to earthquake- 
fire. yet they "arouse the feeling that they are 
allied to man" and can change roles with their trustees. 
hardship makes the soldier; then teachableness 
makes him the philosopher—as socrates, 
prudently testing the suspicious thing, knew 
the wisest is he who’s not sure that he knows. 
who rides on a tiger can never dismount; 
asleep on an elephant, that is repose. 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
a wake 
self-portrait cemetery 
they moved my friends 
nausicaa 
killarnoe 
ah 
armadillo 
i am in love with your brother 
the masturbating flowers 
the pinata 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the internet 
foley artist 
voodoo hypothesis 
keepers of paradise 
don draper 
poseurs 
stranger 
appetites 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
skipping stones 
party music 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
radio 
prague 
redbird 
snake handler 
song of the last shaker 
the trouble with wormholes 
good day villanelle 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
materials 
at the farm 
bare 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
earworm 
mayor snow 
the walls 
through the restaurant window 
we bought a little city 
self-portrait 
not saying 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
poems: 
above picasso and his musings 
1. 
ineptitude's tidings 
ashore me, i'm sprawling stumble- 
drunk in seawrack 
and this grandiose spree of green 
beholds an odd bouquet. 
back at the old sandy blanket, our bodies 
mold mayhem; 
math majors enumerate games 
in the indivisible darkness. 
during a breather, we marvel at the midnight bay 
as it welters moseyingly 
under terminal city's distant subtractions. 
on higher ground, 
my bed has sprung a squeak. tempest- 
tossed, we let it squawk. 
2. 
at loftier 
elevations: picasso and his muses, 
an exhibit we visit 
on our friendship date. 
under a thrust of rain, 
we give up on appearances and sling warmth; 
a false-creeker 
shouts hubba-hubba. 
we shroud the light in a beach-blanket. 
this is more or less 
how it all came to pass. i have no secrets 
in my vending machine home. 
3. 
pablo diego josé francisco de paula juan 
nepomuceno maría de los remedios cipriano 
de la santísima trinidad ruiz y picasso, 
a baby soothered in saints. 
fernande olivier. orphan. pedastelled sixty times. 
pablo builds her a shrine. we stand 
close in front of the dancing 
olga khokhlova minutes. susurrations red-carpet 
marie-thérèse walter's allegorized 
lips. we almost touch by the dora 
maar moments under "a comfortable routine 
interrupted by world war two." 
we read ever so close, then glide 
by geneviève laporte who refuses to move 
in with her lover, which is what 
(she tells françoise gilot) 
"saves her skin." 
later, old pablo mistakes 
a parking meter in madrid 
for jacqueline roque's face. he paints 
the parking meter seventy times. 
4. 
on our second date 
you hold out a gift. i open 
a white piece of paper 
with more creases than a hundred 
hands. it's a map, 
you say. next, you make 
a compass from blue string. 
this will guide 
me through my beachcombing time 
collecting gribble-wrought scrimshaw 
for a sculpture i'm building to the annals 
of honesty hoarders. i'm part 
of many secret clubs. you 
shall know us by our bookshelves' 
blisteringly thin spines. 
i should have put 
that out-of-order sign on my cubist 
pile of a soul long ago. 
some coinage is stuck 
behind my five-dimensional eyes, 
but i want everything 
and you, your mind 
of galax, ivy, peruvian lily, pine, 
pussy willow, yellow rose, and other 
secret handshakes from flowers. 
you incite objects into a rube goldberg 
kabbalah, you're a radiance-chain 
of life-hacks, embroidery, and odyssean cunning. 
as i work out my zonked 
manufacturing to make way towards us 
at play. we genuflect 
in a ceremony of touching, go gung-ho 
into the amalgamating depths. 
after lorne 
the doughy older man in a marine bulldogs jacket 
signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
that's what it takes to get things done, he tells her 
and the rest of the waiting room.if nothing happens, 
you gotta investigate. that's what it means to be a marine. 
yes, lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit, 
her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
credo. yes, lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters 
wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths 
wide, lest we miss our last name/first initial flashed 
upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling. 
this room used to be a participatory democracy. 
now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
we read our patient education leaflets. we wait. 
outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city. 
anishnaabemowin 
this is what came before the world 
it was this 
that called the world 
into being 
so much older than what 
we speak now 
it has flowed through 
more of your ancestors 
than any other 
it has flowed within me 
even when i don't understand 
especially then 
i don't really know 
how you 
came into being 
it must have been this 
that called you 
bells 
stars originate from 
the same place as bells 
what should i be thinking about? 
apparently may 6th 
is world naked gardening day 
if a school were a uterus 
someone writes 
the politicians would protect 
the children inside 
a cupped hand 
a mouthful of water 
snowball the shape of a hand 
after 9/11 i remember writing 
something sarcastic 
intended to be zen 
a poem about not being able to find a sock 
i pissed off the poet 
george murray 
but i realize it's true 
anytime i've lost a sock 
someone's being shot 
even when i haven't lost one 
once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
to the lake 
tashlich: dropping bread into water 
casting off sins 
why am i doing this 
my son said don't believe in it 
what about making the world better? 
the rabbi asked 
yes my son said yes 
my son and i 
late autumn 
walking under the golden leaves 
on my desk 
a stapler, paperclips, some books 
laptop open to american news 
biscuit factory 
send my regards to the paris streets, the poet wrote * 
from exile in america. i will do the same to the room 
on alma, close to the eiffel tower, 
where i stayed with jeannie, from alaska, 
and her turkish friend, hanife. 
one room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
a toilet near the stair. while a man unlocked the door 
and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
into the foyer. the night of my 24thbirthday, 
the cards predicted disaster before i unfastened my handbag 
in the restaurant, to pay. someone had stolen my wallet 
and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
long distance for free. i lined up behind moroccans and turks, 
and phoned my mother at work where a kwakiutl sun 
blazed on the wall behind her. at lunchtime 
she went to the bank in her red high heels, 
and sent me money. why else am i here, 
but to wander until i remember 
the red brick ormand biscuit factory 
near where my father worked in victoria? 
thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
where condos now simper. my father climbed 
to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
to document gauges. we drove up in the chevy, 
to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted 
peter pan dress and stockings. he gave us treats— 
nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
and then my brother and i climbed up the side of the vats 
as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
and noticed us. you know, the condos there now, 
where the oil tanks were, 
and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage, 
are nothing to what happened to the girls 
i thought were my friends, and me. 
we lined up at dior in paris with the models, 
and went in. our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents. 
the breast for sappiness 
the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish 
conspiracy of love 
for those who are clean and sober 
the problem with trying to one-up yourself 
is not that you might die by your own hands, 
but that you'll be able to justify why 
without feeling anything. when you were 
in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt 
from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony 
to what you allowed: "i am satan, because i deal 
in language." the next day, you had stopped 
shaking, you went to work secular and clean. 
there were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
you know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts 
clicking together, lighting up your eyes. they are old 
technology made new, sleek and gleaming 
in crevasses like fog rolling around renfrew. 
you're awake today to see it, because you've been 
brave. you've noticed your friend has listened 
and told you very boring things—not dismissed 
them as errands. this is the task you will have to do, 
soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind 
moved—to write yourself into what you want 
to call conspiracy of love.when the guy from tinder 
said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you 
that he might know you from the internet. you didn't 
remember who he was, not even when he called you 
by your fake name. all you thought was, "i can't 
do this again. i want to be clean. i want to be shazia." 
if you end this poem here, it might make sense, 
but we both know this kind of work is occult. 
so, you have to ask me: how do you want to finish 
this poem? you have to leave it there. that way 
at least it's not about you anymore. 
cree dictionary 
the translation for joy 
in cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
the translation for bittersweet in cree 
looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
eight decades too late 
the translation for patience 
in cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children 
and two of her sister's 
the translation for evil 
in cree is the act of not calling 
your mother on a sunday 
the translation for expedition 
in cree is travelling 20 minutes 
to the only gas station in faust, alberta 
to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
the translation for success in cree 
is executing the perfect frog splash 
on your younger brother 
the cree word for white man is unpaid child support 
the translation for conflicted in cree 
is your deep, steadfast love 
for country superstar 
dwight yoakam (or depending on 
the regional dialect, 
george jones, patsy cline 
or blue rodeo) 
the cree word for constellation 
is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
the translation for policeman 
in cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
the translation for genius 
in cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep 
the cree word for poetry is your four-year-old 
niece's cracked lips spilling out 
broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between 
the gaps in her teeth 
crystals 
b clicks fistfuls of amethysts. b is six. earlier this week, 
in an agassiz campground, she held a tiny 
abandoned rabbit. watership down, 
but with ravers, 
fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, edm 
and bike lights, b's mother gripping 
capsules stuffed 
with crystals 
in her fist. i tell my mother i never want kids. my mother teaches 
motherhood in ontario woods, leads la leche league, 
squirrels worn-out clothes 
for quilts to send 
overseas. my blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy. 
these years as b's nanny, her nature scraping 
against my nurture. 
her mother 
couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected 
t cells, says she sometimes senses this 
distance. what bits of 
my mother 
insist in me? to what do i affix our distance? the burr thicket of it, 
sticky. the body's crystal arithmetic. b gives me 
an amethyst, tells me how 
the rabbit's heart 
beat beneath her fingertips. 
cxxvii 
i'm staring at shakespeare's poem. blocked. carnage because black was not counted fairly. torn into faithless weather because literature assured black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. the critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. informed since i could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of english, i've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of english thinking. the foreign anguish, language! with art's facelessness i borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. shame on who? shame on who? i'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. sometimes you see yourself profaned. sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? somebody doesn't. this situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if i don't bring work home. i'm churning through shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. my children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. they are with me always, as i fail at ease. they don't exist, as i cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard. 
diiiiiiiiid iiiiitttt happen 
the stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. you fill out index cards. press buttons. feel buoyed by laughter and attention. 
a question goes up on the board. you're in it to win it. you're not here to make friends. "what is—the reason she says she drinks." (yay, points!) 
"what is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
(points!)(points!)(points!) 
mom says, "i'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
she sweeps the board. (applause! cries!) 
it doesn't matter. you're pretty sure you're ahead. 
you're in the bonus round. you take turns. one person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. the audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming. 
doing the death we call pretty 
i could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
doing the death we call pretty. instead, i lord 
a little over people parking, coming & goingremark silent 
on body language—what gait is revealing— 
while i wait by the printer for a report 
i don't even need. the chore, it let me remember 
the world, free & flowing. on the hospital elevator 
this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman 
w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children. 
a young, halfway-pregnant couple. a womanmy mother's shape 
in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic. 
a surgeon'scrocs streaked w/purple-brown blood. 
jackson pollock.in the caf, a man tosses fries 
into his mouth for breakfast,his entire head & eyes 
bandaged up, white & soft as a q-tip. vision 
is my drug. i can't tell if it's working, b/c how 
did my life become a sequence of how do i kill 
the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
when is someone going to finally turnto me & say, 
all this time,what have you been doing? 
it will be an accusation, & a mercy. 
don 
don coles died today. today, katie, 
a student i taught, published her first 
book. i think of my teacher, mike, who don 
taught, and i think of all the lessons that 
don must have taught me through mike, all 
mike taught katie through me. i think of 
the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
cupped hands passing this water, without 
breaks, into another cupped pair. i'm amazed 
at how much we can drink and still have more 
to share. i think of all i learned from katie 
just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
the first poem in her first book, and i am 
amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
rush back through me to mike to don, 
another tributary in this miracle river 
that flows in both directions at once. it dawns 
on me how amazing it is that i can be a river 
at the same time that i'm a man underground, 
breaking down on a train, at the same time 
that i'm a ceaseless pen, that i'm blurred words 
clarified through tears, that i'm ink that dreams  it's 
elgin county 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
flattering 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
fuji, baby 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
how soon, how likely, how severe 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
kill poem 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
letter to atleo from the old shell station near buckhorn 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
the lipstick effect 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
marketplace 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
my mother gave me 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
nancy creek: end of summer 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
o sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
ode to the cockroach 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
transition 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
tu me manques 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
under construction 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
union station 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
witch hunt 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 
racter poems 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
uninhabited 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
injun 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
omnivore 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
on day and night (james arthur) 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
the sympathy of angels 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
a local history 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
love is a moontime teaching 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
mornings with the one glove 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
feel happier in nine seconds 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
water glass 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
african evening 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
homecoming 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
happiness is not the only happiness 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
ideal world 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
if you see it what is it you see 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
the myth of orpheus 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
the meaning of life 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
the ship 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
part of the main 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
iain lachlan campbell 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
et in arcadia ego 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
the fifth season 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
funny 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
victoria soto 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
harvest moon lantern festival 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
pastorals in the atrium 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
self storage 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
repose 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
pender and hamilton 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
little voice 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
amygdala 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
anniversary 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
there must be a name for this 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
terra nova, terraformed 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
look book 
over there on the green 
lawn under a sick pine 
is the body of the bird 
his plumage blue when 
i go to look at him and 
wonder if he's dead but 
his chest sort of heaves 
so i bend down closer 
look how the breast 
of the bird splits open 
and a fist of maggots 
spills out on the grass 
a necklace of sticky 
pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
and shining in the july 
light invertebrates that 
form an anecdote before 
i go back into our clapboard 
house to look at the sears 
catalogue and dream 
i am a girl posed into 
happiness look at me 
here now in this new 
dress i've bought with my 
own money at age twenty 
in the city when the cops 
question me i flash my 
passport thinking of 
lichen inching down 
a branch of a tree over 
the town river when i was 
small and somewhere my 
birth father is drunk and 
homeless, half-mad when 
the cops ask for his name 
he'll say, december 
beauty 
beauty is my irreparable and today i became geometric. 
a faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of first principles. 
in a whiteout of atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
vein of euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
surrounded me. i genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father's jaundice, for i am a good daughter of the colony. 
the colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
i should service or else receive a lesser dessert. with my smudge 
cleanse at the ready i find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
to time, or i'm out of it, entirely. chanting hell as hair veils 
my face as if this is a western. come polygon and i circumvent 
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. holy i went, holy 
all around my head, the holy i am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. striated by the pinnacle 
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
of its gravity. you can scan the ground from overhead for death 
pits. i read this on the internet when i was dehydrated, lonely, 
and afraid. office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition's patent heart. i've gone and been abominable. 
a column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
at the edges of my system an anishinabek or indo-european 
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
space of animal magnetism. white pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. oh, inconsequent curb 
of my street i refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
charged with trafficking. still waiting to be ordained, i make 
mask of our features that are retreating. plush pockets of rust 
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. i've gone 
and got a blister. that summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
porch. a half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. so i continue 
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where i am only just alive. 
bozo, today is over. 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
saint valentine, 
although late, would "some interested law 
impelled to plod in the poem’s cause" 
be unwelcome with a line? 
might you have liked a stone 
from a de beers consolidated mine? 
or badger-neat saber-thronged thistle 
of palestine—the leaves alone 
down’d underneath, 
worth a touch? or that mimosa-leafed vine 
called an "alexander’s armillary 
sphere" fanning out in a wreath? 
or did the ark 
preserve paradise-birds with jet-black plumes, 
whose descendants might serve as presents? 
but questioning is the mark 
of a pest! why think 
only of animals in connection 
with the ark or the wine noah drank? 
but that the ark did not sink. 
there are four vibrators, the world’s exactest clocks; 
and these quartz time-pieces that tell 
time intervals to other clocks, 
these worksless clocks work well; 
and all four, independently the 
same, are there in the cool bell 
laboratory time 
vault. checked by a comparator with arlington, 
they punctualize the "radio, 
cinéma," and "presse,"—a group the 
giraudoux truth-bureau 
of hoped-for accuracy has termed 
"instruments of truth." we know— 
as jean giraudoux says 
certain arabs have not heard—that napoleon 
is dead; that a quartz prism when 
the temperature changes, feels 
the change and that the then 
electrified alternate edges 
oppositely charged, threaten 
careful timing; so that 
this water-clear crystal as the greeks used to say, 
this "clear ice" must be kept at the 
same coolness. repetition, with 
the scientist, should be 
synonymous with accuracy. 
the lemur-student can see 
that an aye-aye is not 
an angwan-tíbo, potto, or loris. the sea- 
side burden should not embarrass 
the bell-boy with the buoy-ball 
endeavoring to pass 
hotel patronesses; nor could a 
practiced ear confuse the glass 
eyes for taxidermists 
with eye-glasses from the optometrist. and as 
meridian-7 1, 2 
1, 2 gives, each fifteenth second 
in the same voice, the new 
data—"the time will be" so and so— 
you realize that "when you 
hear the signal," you’ll be 
hearing jupiter or jour pater, the day god— 
the salvaged son of father time— 
telling the cannibal chronos 
(eater of his proxime 
newborn progeny) that punctuality 
is not a crime. 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
you ran naked out the door. 
the neighbours laughed; i chased you down. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i know you're busy. 
did i tell you when you were little how 
you ran naked out the door? 
you got halfway down the street 
before i caught you in my arms. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i think i told you this before: 
i was giving you a bath and then 
you ran naked out the door. 
it happened fast. 
the neighbours laughed. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
you have to watch a baby close. 
i remember once— 
you ran naked out the door. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
half worm. we all, infant and adult, have 
stopped to watch the butterfly—last of the 
elves—and learned to spare the wingless worm 
that hopefully ascends the tree. the well-known 
silk tiger swallowtail 
of south america, with body lightly 
furred was that bearing pigments which engrave 
the lower wings with dragon’s blood, weightless. 
they that have wings must not have weights. this more 
peninsula-tailed one with a black 
pitchfork-scallop edge on sunburnt zebra-skin, 
tired by the trip it made 
with drover-like tenacity, has been 
sleeping upright on the elm. its yellowness, 
that of the autumn poplar-leaf, by day 
has been observed. disguised in butterfly- 
bush wedgwood-blue, psyche follows it 
to that small tree, micromalus, the midget 
crab; to the mimosa; 
and from that, to the flowering pomegranate. 
baffled not by the quick-clouding serene gray 
moon but forced by the hot hot sun to pant, 
she stands on rug-soft grass; though "it is not 
permitted to gaze informally 
on majesty in such a manner as might 
well happen here." the blind 
all-seeing butterfly, fearing the slight 
finger, wanders, as though it were ignorant, 
across the path and lights on zephyr’s palm, 
planting forefeet soberly; then pawing 
like a horse, turns round—apostrophe- 
tipped brown antennae: porcupining out as 
it arranges nervous 
wings. vexed because curiosity has 
been pursuing it, it cannot now be calm. 
the butterfly’s round unglazed china eyes, 
pale tobacco brown, with the large eyes of 
the nymph on them—gray eyes that now are 
black, for she with controlled agitated glance 
observes the insect’s face 
and all’s a-quiver with significance— 
enact the scene of cats’ eyes on the magpie’s 
eyes, by goya. butterflies do not need 
home advice. as though zephyr and psyche 
were patent-leather cricket singing 
loud, and gnat-catching garden-toad, the swallow- 
tail bewitched and danger- 
ous, springs away, zebra half-deified, 
trampling the air as it tramples the flowers, feed- 
ing where it pivots. twig-veined irascible 
fastidious stubborn undisciplined 
zebra! sometimes one is grateful to 
a stranger for looking very nice. but free 
to leave the outspread hand 
it flies, drunken with triviality 
or guided by visions of strength, off until, 
diminishing like wreckage on the sea, 
rising and falling easily, it mounts 
the swell and keeping its true course with 
what swift majesty, indifferent to 
us, is gone. deaf to ap- 
proval—magnet-nice, as it flutters through 
airs now slack, now fresh. it has strict ears when the 
west wind speaks. it was he, with mirror eyes 
of strong anxiety, who had no net 
or flowering shrewd-scented tropical 
device, or lignum vitae perch in half-shut 
hand; for ours is not a 
canely land; nor was it oberon, but 
this quiet young man with piano replies, 
named zephyr, whose hand spread out was enough 
to tempt the fiery tiger-horse to stand, 
eyes staring skyward and chest arching 
bravely out—historic metamorphoser 
and saintly animal 
in india, in egypt, anywhere. 
his talk was as strange as my grandmother’s muff. 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
not of silver nor of coral, 
but of weatherbeaten laurel. 
here, he introduced a sea 
uniform like tapestry; 
here, a fig-tree; there, a face; 
there, a dragon circling space— 
designating here, a bower; 
there, a pointed passion-flower. 
the pin-swin or spine-swine 
(the edgehog miscalled hedgehog) with all his edges out, 
echidna and echinoderm in distressed- 
pin-cushion thorn-fur coats, the spiny pig or porcupine, 
the rhino with horned snout— 
everything is battle-dressed. 
pig-fur won’t do, i’ll wrap 
myself in salamander-skin like presbyter john. 
a lizard in the midst of flames, a firebrand 
that is life, asbestos-eyed asbestos-eared, with tattooed nap 
and permanent pig on 
the instep; he can withstand 
fire and won’t drown. in his 
unconquerable country of unpompous gusto, 
gold was so common none considered it; greed 
and flattery were unknown. though rubies large as tennis- 
balls conjoined in streams so 
that the mountain seemed to bleed, 
the inextinguishable 
salamander styled himself but presbyter. his shield 
was his humility. in carpasian 
linen coat, flanked by his household lion-cubs and sable 
retinue, he revealed 
a formula safer than 
an armorer’s: the power of relinquishing 
what one would keep; that is freedom. become dinosaur- 
skulled, quilled or salamander-wooled, more ironshod 
and javelin-dressed than a hedgehog battalion of steel, but be 
dull. don’t be envied or 
armed with a measuring-rod. 
propriety 
is some such word 
as the chord 
brahms had heard 
from a bird, 
sung down near the root of the throat; 
it’s the little downy woodpecker 
spiraling up a tree— 
up up up like mercury; 
a not long 
sparrow-song 
of hayseed 
magnitude— 
a tuned reticence with rigor 
a neat, round hole in the bank of the creek 
means a rat; 
that is to say, craft, industry, resourcefulness: 
while 
these indicate the unfortunate, meek 
habitat 
of surgery thrust home to fabricate useless 
voids. 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
know it if i squeezed too hard. i would be a great bear. i would 
go rumbling through. 
i would try to eat you. i would stand alone, 
in the quiet centre of you, and roar. no, i 
could not love you. i could not 
love a human being. 
i would get so 
stuck on things. the small 
flaws in you, like 
the way that you will die; 
it would stick in my throat, i could not love you. 
and the way that, if you touched me, i would be 
as if to you a solid object, 
as if a boot, a stick, a stone. 
and you to me. the way that i could 
pick you up. that i could 
hammer you against me; that i could 
bruise myself on you, and still have only a 
brief impression of you left there on my skin. 
and, if i cried, that too would be 
an imitation of the thing that i would feel. 
and the pain itself, if it were real, would come as if 
so separately from you that it might 
equally have been a whip, a rope, 
a rail with which i thrashed myself when i 
thrashed myself with you. 
no, i could not love a human being if they 
could not leave a mark. 
even if i were a bear 
and i ate you, you would 
move right through me. 
even if you were a bear 
and you ate me, i would 
move right through you. 
but i am not a bear. and will not eat you. 
if i said i could, i could not. 
and you are not a bear. and will not eat me. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
if you will tell me why the fen 
appears impassable, i then 
will tell you why i think that i 
can get across it if i try. 
is found, of the amphibious falling dragon, the living firework. 
he leaps and meets his 
likeness in the stream and, king with king, 
helped by his three-part plume along the back, runs on two legs, 
tail dragging; faints upon the air; then with a spring 
dives to the stream-bed, hiding as the chieftain with gold body hid in 
guatavita lake. 
he runs, he flies, he swims, to get to 
his basilica—"the ruler of rivers, lakes, and seas, 
invisible or visible," with clouds to do 
as bid—and can be "long or short, and also coarse or fine at pleasure." with a 
modest quiver, he 
ascends the bank on clinging tree-frog 
hands, and waits; the water draining, forms a lizard there, from 
skin now looking a little newer than the log 
it rested on & the thick mass of verdure all about. this is the 
feather basilisk 
of travelers’ tales, of which a pair stood 
bodyguard beside confucius’ crib: aquatic flying 
lizard-fairy detested by such dragonhood 
as michael fought. one has seen animals like his, though smaller, collide 
and fight, brother matched 
with brother, as if immune to pain; 
push, struggle and breathe hard; swell out and muster strength, withdraw, 
advance; and swerving, almost fall—hoping to gain 
the mortal hold and that some fang should pierce the marrow. but when plumet 
territories touch, 
the masters of them are dramatic 
without shedding blood, exerting charm as chinese dragonwhiskers 
in a crystal handle charm; or as thickflowering 
orchids gather dragons, in the east, by forming clouds for them. 
cowed by his uningenious will 
of dragon-like demeanor, till 
it left them orphans. 
his foibles clustered underneath 
him, dominated by a wreath 
of upright half notes. 
encumbered as he was with pride, 
but for that coat he might have died 
so despicably 
that kindness might have seemed unkind 
had not the garment been designed 
to serve two masters. 
if yellow betokens infidelity, 
i am an infidel. 
i could not bear a yellow rose ill will 
because books said that yellow boded ill, 
white promised well; 
however, your particular possession— 
the sense of privacy 
in what you did—deflects from your estate 
offending eyes, and will not tolerate 
effrontery. 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
not in the days of adam and eve but when adam 
was alone; when there was no smoke and color was 
fine, not with the fineness of 
early civilization art but by virtue 
of its originality; with nothing to modify it but the 
mist that went up, obliqueness was a varia- 
tion of the perpendicular, plain to see and 
to account for: it is no 
longer that; nor did the blue red yellow band 
of incandescence that was color keep its stripe: it also is one of 
those things into which much that is peculiar can be 
read; complexity is not a crime but carry 
it to the point of murkiness 
and nothing is plain. complexity 
moreover, that has been committed to darkness, instead of granting it- 
self to be the pestilence that it is, moves all a- 
bout as if to bewilder us with the dismal 
fallacy that insistence 
is the measure of achievement and that all 
truth must be dark. principally throat, sophistication is as it al- 
ways has been—at the antipodes from the init- 
ial great truths. "part of it was crawling, part of it 
was about to crawl, the rest 
was torpid in its lair." in the short legged, fit- 
ful advance, the gurgling and all the minutiae—we have the classic 
multitude of feet. to what purpose! truth is no apollo 
belvedere, no formal thing. the wave may go over it if it likes. 
know that it will be there when it says: 
"i shall be there when the wave has gone by. 
make a fuss 
and be tedious. 
i’m annoyed? 
yes; am—avoid 
"adore" 
and "bore"; 
am, i 
say, by 
the word 
bore, bored; 
refuse 
to use 
"divine" 
to mean 
something 
pleasing; 
"terrific color" 
for some horror. 
though flat, 
myself, i’d say that 
"atlas" 
(pressed glass) 
looks best 
embossed. 
i refuse 
to use 
"enchant," 
"dement"; 
even "fright- 
ful plight" 
(however justified) 
or "frivol- 
ous fool" 
(however suitable). 
i’ve escaped? 
am still trapped 
by these 
word diseases. 
no pauses— 
the phrases 
lack lyric 
force; sound capric- 
like attic 
capric-alcaic, 
or freak 
calico-greek. 
(not verse 
of course) 
i’m sure of this: 
nothing mundane is divine; 
nothing divine is mundane. 
this is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
this is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
the river that runs from eden mouth 
to rare unsweetened mouth. 
i've logged the sour dawns of all 
my quiet into this body, 
its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
and reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
in the morse events of smallest things 
in my new metropolis away. 
i am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
call me isobar. distraction in place of earth. 
call me tropical depression 
where i regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
i'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
but enough. hear morne d'or divinize her song. 
give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom. 
all too literally, their flesh 
and their spirit are our shield 
new york times, 7th june, 1944 
i should like to see that country’s tiles, bedrooms, 
stone patios 
and ancient wells: rinaldo 
caramonica’s the cobbler’s, frank sblendorio’s 
and dominick angelastro’s country— 
the grocer’s, the iceman’s, the dancer’s—the 
beautiful miss damiano’s; wisdom’s 
and all angels’ italy, this christmas day 
this christmas year. 
a noiseless piano, an 
innocent war, the heart that can act against itself. here, 
each unlike and all alike, could 
so many—stumbling, falling, multiplied 
till bodies lay as ground to walk on—say 
"if christ and the apostles died in vain, i’ll 
die in vain with them"? 
when the very heart was a prayer 
against this way of victory. stem after stem 
of what we call the tree—set, row 
on row; that forest of white crosses; the 
vision makes us faint. my eyes won’t close to it. while 
the knife was lifted, isaac the offering 
lay mute. 
these, laid like animals for sacrifice, 
like isaac on the mount, were their own substitute. 
and must they all be harmed by those 
whom they have saved. tears that don’t fall are what 
they wanted. belief in belief marching 
marching marching—all alone, all similar, 
spurning pathos, 
clothed in fear—marching to death 
marching to life; it was like the cross, is like the cross. 
keeping their world large, that silent 
marching marching marching and this silence 
for which there is no description, are 
the voices of fighters with no rests between, 
who would not yield; 
whose spirits and whose bodies 
all too literally were our shield, are still our shield. 
they fought the enemy, we fight 
fat living and self-pity. shine, o shine 
unfalsifying sun, on this sick scene. 
of our ancient people. 
ah 
an open moment, 
a prolonging 
of notice 
without reaction, a downward 
fountain of data, filling. 
unclosing, throat's 
wholeness, wide, 
to swallow 
the thrall of all of it: 
full bulge of gulp 
held— 
nothing undulating, no 
void vacuum 
pursuing a present cud 
through 
a human tunnel. 
sustained hum, 
sustenance 
pouring, not pulsing. 
rinse without erosion, 
flush without the closed 
push of peristalsis. 
clarity 
not needing blur 
to know itself. 
armadillo 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
i am in love with your brother 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
the masturbating flowers 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
the pinata 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
the internet 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
foley artist 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
voodoo hypothesis 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
or the spike 
of a channel marker or the 
moon, he superintended the demolition of his image in 
the water by the wind; he did not strike 
them at the 
time as being different from 
any other inhabitant of the water; it was as if he 
were a seal in the combined livery 
of bird plus 
snake; it was as if he knew that 
the penguins were not fish and as if in their bat blindness, they did not 
realize that he was amphibious. 
appellate jurisdiction 
to william butler yeats on tagore 
to a friend in the making 
he made this screen 
holes bored in a workbag by the scissors 
apropos of mice 
the just man and 
in "designing a cloak to cloak his designs," you wrested from oblivion, a coat of immortality for your own use. 
the past is the present 
old tiger 
poems: 
to an intra-mural rat 
you make me think of many men 
once met to be forgot again 
or merely resurrected 
in a parenthesis of wit 
that found them hastening through it 
too brisk to be inspected. 
reticence and volubility 
"when i am dead," 
the wizard said, 
"i’ll look upon the narrow way 
and this dante, 
and know that he was right 
and he’ll delight 
in my remorse, 
of course." 
"when i am dead," 
the student said, 
"i shall have grown so tolerant, 
i’ll find i can’t 
laugh at your sorry plight 
or take delight 
in your chagrin, 
merlin." 
to a chameleon 
hid by the august foliage and fruit of the grape vine, 
twine, 
your anatomy 
round the pruned and polished stem, 
chameleon. 
fire laid upon 
an emerald as long as 
the dark king’s massy 
one, 
could not snap the spectrum up for food as you have done. 
a talisman 
under a splintered mast, 
torn from the ship and cast 
near her hull, 
a stumbling shepherd found 
embedded in the ground, 
a seagull 
of lapis lazuli, 
a scarab of the sea, 
with wings spread— 
curling its coral feet, 
parting its beak to greet 
men long dead. 
injudicious gardening 
if yellow betokens infidelity, 
i am an infidel. 
i could not bear a yellow rose ill will 
because books said that yellow boded ill, 
white promised well; 
however, your particular possession— 
the sense of privacy 
in what you did—deflects from your estate 
offending eyes, and will not tolerate 
effrontery. 
a fool, a foul thing, a distressful lunatic 
with webs of cool 
chain mail and his stout heart, is not the gander 
mocked, and ignorantly designated yet, 
to play the fool? 
"egyptian vultures clean as cherubim, 
all ivory and jet," are they most foul? 
and nature’s child, 
that most precocious water bird, the loon — why 
is he foremost in the madman’s alphabet; 
why is he styled 
in folly’s catalogue, distressful lunatic? 
to military progress 
you use your mind 
like a millstone to grind 
chaff. 
you polish it 
and with your warped wit 
laugh 
at your torso, 
prostrate where the crow 
falls 
on such faint hearts 
as its god imparts, 
calls 
and claps its wings 
till the tumult brings 
more 
black minute-men 
to revive again, 
war 
at little cost. 
they cry for the lost 
head 
and seek their prize 
till the evening sky’s 
red 
an egyptian pulled glass bottle in the shape of a fish 
here we have thirst 
and patience from the first, 
and art, as in a wave held up for us to see 
in its essential perpendicularity; 
not brittle but 
intense—the spectrum, that 
spectacular and nimble animal the fish, 
whose scales turn aside the sun’s sword with their polish. 
to a steam roller 
the illustration 
is nothing to you without the application. 
you lack half wit. you crush all the particles down 
into close conformity, and then walk back and forth on them. 
sparkling chips of rock 
are crushed down to the level of the parent block. 
were not "impersonal judgment in aesthetic matters, a metaphysical impossibility," you 
might fairly achieve 
it. as for butterflies, i can hardly conceive 
of one’s attending upon you, but to question 
the congruence of the complement is vain, if it exists. 
diligence is to magic as progress is to flight 
with an elephant to ride upon — "with rings on her fingers and bells on her toes," 
she shall outdistance calamity anywhere she goes. 
speed is not in her mind inseparable from carpets. locomotion arose 
in the shape of an elephant; she clambered up and chose 
to travel laboriously. so far as magic carpets are concerned, she knows 
that although the semblance of speed may attach to scarecrows 
of aesthetic procedure, the substance of it is embodied in such of those 
tough-grained animals as have outstripped man’s whim to suppose 
them ephemera, and have earned that fruit of their ability to endure blows, 
which dubs them prosaic necessities—not curios. 
to a snail 
if "compression is the first grace of style," 
you have it. contractility is a virtue 
as modesty is a virtue. 
it is not the acquisition of any one thing 
that is able to adorn, 
or the incidental quality that occurs 
as a concomitant of something well said, 
that we value in style, 
but the principle that is hid: 
in the absence of feet, "a method of conclusions"; 
"a knowledge of principles," 
in the curious phenomenon of your occipital horn. 
the bricks are fallen down, we will build with hewn stones. the sycamores are cut down, we will change to cedars. 
in what sense shall we be able to 
secure to ourselves peace and do as they did— 
who, when they were not able to rid 
themselves of war, cast out fear? 
they did not say: "we shall not be brought 
into subjection by the naughtiness of the sea; 
though we have ‘defeated ourselves with 
false balances’ and laid weapons in the scale, 
glory shall spring from in-glory; hail, 
flood, earthquake, and famine shall 
not intimidate us nor shake the 
foundations of our inalienable energy." 
nothing will cure the sick lion but to eat an ape 
perceiving that in the masked ball 
attitude, there is a hollowness 
that beauty’s light momentum can’t redeem, 
since disproportionate satisfaction anywhere 
lacks a proportionate air, 
he let us know without offense 
by his hands’ denunciatory 
upheaval, that he despised the fashion 
of curing us with an ape—making it his care 
to smother us with fresh air. 
to statecraft embalmed 
there is nothing to be said for you. guard 
your secret. conceal it under your hard 
plumage, necromancer. 
o 
bird, whose tents were "awnings of egyptian 
yarn," shall justice’ faint, zigzag inscription— 
leaning like a dancer— 
show 
the pulse of its once vivid sovereignty? 
you say not, and transmigrating from the 
sarcophagus, you wind 
snow 
silence round us and with moribund talk, 
half limping and half ladified, you stalk 
about. ibis, we find 
no 
virtue in you—alive and yet so dumb. 
discreet behavior is not now the sum 
of statesmanlike good sense. 
though 
it were the incarnation of dead grace? 
as if a death mask ever could replace 
life’s faulty excellence! 
slow 
to remark the steep, too strict proportion 
of your throne, you’ll see the wrenched distortion 
of suicidal dreams 
go 
staggering toward itself and with its bill, 
attack its own identity, until 
foe seems friend and friend seems 
foe. 
the monkey puzzler 
a kind of monkey or pine-lemur 
not of interest to the monkey, 
but to the animal higher up which resembles it, 
in a kind of flaubert’s carthage, it defies one— 
this "paduan cat with lizard," this "tiger in a bamboo thicket." 
"an interwoven somewhat," it will not come out. 
ignore the foo dog and it is forthwith more than a dog, 
its tail superimposed upon itself in a complacent half spiral, 
incidentally so witty; 
but this pine-tree—this pine-tiger, is a tiger, not a dog. 
it knows that if a nomad may have dignity, 
gibraltar has had more— 
that "it is better to be lonely than unhappy." 
a conifer contrived in imitation of the glyptic work of jade and hard stone cutters, 
a true curio in this bypath of curio collecting, 
it is worth its weight in gold but no one takes it 
from these woods in which society’s not knowing is colossal, 
the lion’s ferocious chrysanthemum head seeming kind in comparison. 
this porcupine-quilled, infinitely complicated starkness— 
this is beauty—"a certain proportion in the skeleton which gives the best results." 
one is at a loss, however, to know why it should be here, 
in this morose part of the earth— 
to account for its origin at all; 
but we prove, we do not explain our birth. 
poetry 
i too, dislike it: there are things that are important beyond all this fiddle. 
reading it, however, with a perfect contempt for it, one discovers that there is in 
it after all, a place for the genuine. 
hands that can grasp, eyes 
that can dilate, hair that can rise 
if it must, these things are important not because a 
high sounding interpretation can be put upon them but because they are 
useful; when they become so derivative as to become unintelligible, 
the same thing may be said for all of us, that we 
do not admire what 
we cannot understand: the bat, 
holding on upside down or in quest of something to 
eat, elephants pushing, a wild horse taking a roll, a tireless wolf under 
a tree, the immovable critic twitching his skin like a horse that feels a flea, the base- 
ball fan, the statistician— 
nor is it valid 
to discriminate against "business documents and 
school-books"; all these phenomena are important. one must make a distinction 
however: when dragged into prominence by half poets, the result is not poetry, 
nor till the poets among us can be 
"literalists of 
the imagination"—above 
insolence and triviality and can present 
for inspection, imaginary gardens with real toads in them, shall we have 
it. in the meantime, if you demand on one hand, 
the raw material of poetry in 
all its rawness and 
that which is on the other hand 
genuine, then you are interested in poetry. 
critics and connoisseurs 
there is a great amount of poetry in unconscious 
fastidiousness. certain ming 
products, imperial floor coverings of coach wheel yellow, are well enough in their way but i have seen something 
that i like better—a 
mere childish attempt to make an imperfectly ballasted animal stand up, 
similar determination to make a pup 
eat his meat on the plate. 
i remember a swan under the willows in oxford 
with flamingo colored, maple- 
leaflike feet. it reconnoitered like a battle ship. disbelief and conscious fastidiousness were the staple 
ingredients in its 
disinclination to move. finally its hardihood was not proof against its 
proclivity to more fully appraise such bits 
of food as the stream 
bore counter to it; it made away with what i gave it 
to eat. i have seen this swan and 
i have seen you; i have seen ambition without understanding in a variety of forms. happening to stand 
by an ant hill, i have 
seen a fastidious ant carrying a stick, north, south, east, west, till it turned on 
itself, struck out from the flower bed into the lawn, 
and returned to the point 
from which it had started. then abandoning the stick as 
useless and overtaxing its 
jaws with a particle of whitewash pill-like but heavy, it again went through the same course of procedure. what is 
there in being able 
to say that one has dominated the stream in an attitude of self defense, 
in proving that one has had the experience 
of carrying a stick? 
to be liked by you would be a calamity 
"attack is more piquant than concord," but when 
you tell me frankly that you would like to feel 
my flesh beneath your feet, 
i’m all abroad; i can but put my weapon up, and 
bow you out. 
gesticulation—it is half the language. 
let unsheathed gesticulation be the steel 
your courtesy must meet, 
since in your hearing words are mute, which to my senses 
are a shout. 
like a bulrush 
or the spike 
of a channel marker or the 
moon, he superintended the demolition of his image in 
the water by the wind; he did not strike 
them at the 
time as being different from 
any other inhabitant of the water; it was as if he 
were a seal in the combined livery 
of bird plus 
snake; it was as if he knew that 
the penguins were not fish and as if in their bat blindness, they did not 
realize that he was amphibious. 
sojourn in the whale 
trying to open locked doors with a sword, threading 
the points of needles, planting shade trees upside down; swallowed by the opaqueness of one whom the seas 
love better than they love you, ireland— 
you have lived and lived on every kind of shortage. 
you have been compelled by hags to spin gold thread from straw and have heard men 
say: "there is a feminine 
temperament in direct contrast to 
ours which makes her do these things. circumscribed by a 
heritage of blindness and native incompetence, she will become wise and will be forced to give 
in. compelled by experience, she 
will turn back; water seeks its own level": and you 
have smiled. "water in motion is far 
from level." you have seen it when obstacles happened to bar 
the path—rise automatically. 
my apish cousins 
winked too much and were afraid of snakes. the zebras, supreme in 
their abnormality; the elephants with their fog-colored skin 
and strictly practical appendages 
were there, the small cats; and the parakeet— 
trivial and humdrum on examination, destroying 
bark and portions of the food it could not eat. 
i recall their magnificence, now not more magnificent 
than it is dim. it is difficult to recall the ornament, 
speech, and precise manner of what one might 
call the minor acquaintances twenty 
years back; but i shall not forget him—that gilgamesh among 
the hairy carnivora—that cat with the 
wedge-shaped, slate-gray marks on its forelegs and the resolute tail, 
astringently remarking: "they have imposed on us with their pale 
half fledged protestations, trembling about 
in inarticulate frenzy, saying 
it is not for us to understand art; finding it 
all so difficult, examining the thing 
as if it were inconceivably arcanic, as symmet- 
rically frigid as if it had been carved out of chrysoprase 
or marble—strict with tension, malignant 
in its power over us and deeper 
than the sea when it proffers flattery in exchange for hemp, 
rye, flax, horses, platinum, timber, and fur. 
roses only 
you do not seem to realise that beauty is a liability rather than 
an asset—that in view of the fact that spirit creates form we are justified in supposing 
that you must have brains. for you, a symbol of the unit, stiff and sharp, 
conscious of surpassing by dint of native superiority and liking for everything 
self-dependent, anything an 
ambitious civilization might produce: for you, unaided to attempt through sheer 
reserve, to confute presumptions resulting from observation, is idle. you cannot make us 
think you a delightful happen-so. but rose, if you are brilliant, it 
is not because your petals are the without-which-nothing of pre-eminence. you would, minus thorns, 
look like a what-is-this, a mere 
peculiarity. they are not proof against a worm, the elements, or mildew 
but what about the predatory hand? what is brilliance without co-ordination? guarding the 
infinitesimal pieces of your mind, compelling audience to 
the remark that it is better to be forgotten than to be remembered too violently, 
your thorns are the best part of you. 
the fish 
wade 
through black jade. 
of the crow-blue mussel shells, one 
keeps 
adjusting the ash heaps; 
opening and shutting itself like 
an 
injured fan. 
the barnacles which encrust the 
side 
of the wave, cannot hide 
there for the submerged shafts of the 
sun, 
split like spun 
glass, move themselves with spotlight swift- 
ness 
into the crevices— 
in and out, illuminating 
the 
turquoise sea 
of bodies. the water drives a 
wedge 
of iron through the iron edge 
of the cliff, whereupon the stars, 
pink 
rice grains, ink 
bespattered jelly-fish, crabs like 
green 
lilies and submarine 
toadstools, slide each on the other. 
all 
external 
marks of abuse are present on 
this 
defiant edifice— 
all the physical features of 
ac- 
cident—lack 
of cornice, dynamite grooves, burns 
and 
hatchet strokes, these things stand 
out on it; the chasm side is 
dead. 
repeated 
evidence has proved that it can 
live 
on what cannot revive 
its youth. the sea grows old in it. 
black earth 
openly, yes, 
with the naturalness 
of the hippopotamus or the alligator 
when it climbs out on the bank to experience the 
sun, i do these 
things which i do, which please 
no one but myself. now i breathe and now i am submerged; 
the blemishes stand up and shout when the object 
in view was a 
renaissance; shall i say 
the contrary? the sediment of the river which 
encrusts my joints, makes me very gray but i am used 
to it, it may 
remain there; do away 
with it and i am myself done away with, for the 
patina of circumstance can but enrich what was 
there to begin 
with. this elephant skin 
which i inhabit, fibered over like the shell of 
the coconut, this piece of black glass through which no light 
can filter—cut 
into checkers by rut 
upon rut of unpreventable experience— 
it is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the 
hairy toed. black 
but beautiful, my back 
is full of the history of power. of power? what 
is powerful and what is not? my soul shall never 
be cut into 
by a wooden spear; throughout 
childhood to the present time, the unity of 
life and death has been expressed by the circumference 
described by my 
trunk; nevertheless, i 
perceive feats of strength to be inexplicable after 
all; and i am on my guard; external poise, it 
has its center 
well nurtured—we know 
where—in pride, but spiritual poise, it has its center where? 
my ears are sensitized to more than the sound of 
the wind. i see 
and i hear, unlike the 
wandlike body of which one hears so much, which was made 
to see and not to see; to hear and not to hear; 
that tree trunk without 
roots, accustomed to shout 
its own thoughts to itself like a shell, maintained intact 
by one who knows what strange pressure of the atmosphere; that 
spiritual 
brother to the coral 
plant, absorbed into which, the equable sapphire light 
becomes a nebulous green. the i of each is to 
the i of each, 
a kind of fretful speech 
which sets a limit on itself; the elephant is? 
black earth preceded by a tendril? it is to that 
phenomenon 
the above formation, 
translucent like the atmosphere—a cortex merely— 
that on which darts cannot strike decisively the first 
time, a substance 
needful as an instance 
of the indestructibility of matter; it 
has looked at the electricity and at the earth- 
quake and is still 
here; the name means thick. will 
depth be depth, thick skin be thick, to one who can see no 
beautiful element of unreason under it? 
radical 
tapering 
to a point, conserving everything, 
this carrot is predestined to be thick. 
the world is 
but a circumstance, a mis- 
erable corn-patch for its feet. with ambition, imagination, outgrowth, 
nutriment, 
with everything crammed belligerent- 
ly inside itself, its fibers breed mon- 
opoly— 
a tail-like, wedge-shaped engine with the 
secret of expansion, fused with intensive heat to color of the set- 
ting sun and 
stiff. for the man in the straw hat, stand- 
ing still and turning to look back at it, 
as much as 
to say my happiest moment has 
been funereal in comparison with this, the conditions of life pre- 
determined 
slavery to be easy and freedom hard. for 
it? dismiss 
agrarian lore; it tells him this: 
that which it is impossible to force, it is impossible 
to hinder. 
in the days of prismatic color 
not in the days of adam and eve but when adam 
was alone; when there was no smoke and color was 
fine, not with the fineness of 
early civilization art but by virtue 
of its originality; with nothing to modify it but the 
mist that went up, obliqueness was a varia- 
tion of the perpendicular, plain to see and 
to account for: it is no 
longer that; nor did the blue red yellow band 
of incandescence that was color keep its stripe: it also is one of 
those things into which much that is peculiar can be 
read; complexity is not a crime but carry 
it to the point of murkiness 
and nothing is plain. complexity 
moreover, that has been committed to darkness, instead of granting it- 
self to be the pestilence that it is, moves all a- 
bout as if to bewilder us with the dismal 
fallacy that insistence 
is the measure of achievement and that all 
truth must be dark. principally throat, sophistication is as it al- 
ways has been—at the antipodes from the init- 
ial great truths. "part of it was crawling, part of it 
was about to crawl, the rest 
was torpid in its lair." in the short legged, fit- 
ful advance, the gurgling and all the minutiae—we have the classic 
multitude of feet. to what purpose! truth is no apollo 
belvedere, no formal thing. the wave may go over it if it likes. 
know that it will be there when it says: 
"i shall be there when the wave has gone by. 
peter 
strong and slippery, built for the midnight grass-party confronted by four cats, 
he sleeps his time away—the detached first claw on his foreleg which corresponds 
to the thumb, retracted to its tip; the small tuft of fronds 
or katydid legs above each eye, still numbering the units in each group; 
the shadbones regularly set about his mouth, to droop or rise 
in unison like the porcupine’s quills—motionless. he lets himself be flat- 
tened out by gravity, as it were a piece of seaweed tamed and weakened by 
exposure to the sun; compelled when extended, to lie 
stationary. sleep is the result of his delusion that one must do as 
well as one can for oneself; sleep—epitome of what is to 
him as to the average person, the end of life. demonstrate on him how 
the lady caught the dangerous southern snake, placing a forked stick on either 
side of its innocuous neck; one need not try to stir 
him up; his prune shaped head and alligator eyes are not a party to the 
joke. lifted and handled, he may be dangled like an eel or set 
up on the forearm like a mouse; his eyes bisected by pupils of a pin’s 
width, are flickeringly exhibited, then covered up. may be? i should say, 
might have been; when he has been got the better of in a 
dream—as in a fight with nature or with cats—we all know it. profound sleep is 
not with him, a fixed illusion. springing about with froglike ac- 
curacy, emitting jerky cries when taken in the hand, he is himself 
again; to sit caged by the rungs of a domestic chair would be unprofit- 
able—human. what is the good of hypocrisy? it 
is permissible to choose one’s employment, to abandon the wire nail, the 
roly-poly, when it shows signs of being no longer a pleas- 
ure, to score the adjacent magazine with a double line of strokes. he can 
talk, but insolently says nothing. what of it? when one is frank, one’s very 
presence is a compliment. it is clear that he can see 
the virtue of naturalness, that he is one of those who do not regard 
the published fact as a surrender. as for the disposition 
invariably to affront, an animal with claws wants to have to use 
them; that eel-like extension of trunk into tail is not an accident. to 
leap, to lengthen out, divide the air—to purloin, to pursue, 
to tell the hen: fly over the fence, go in the wrong way—in your perturbation— 
this is life; to do less would be nothing but dishonesty. 
picking and choosing 
literature is a phase of life: if 
one is afraid of it, the situation is irremediable; if 
one approaches it familiarly, 
what one says of it is worthless. words are constructive 
when they are true; the opaque allusion—the simulated flight 
upward—accomplishes nothing. why cloud the fact 
that shaw is self-conscious in the field of sentiment but is otherwise re- 
warding? that james is all that has been 
said of him, if feeling is profound? it is not hardy 
the distinguished novelist and hardy the poet, but one man 
"interpreting life through the medium of the 
emotions." if he must give an opinion, it is permissible that the 
critic should know what he likes. gordon 
craig with his "this is i" and "this is mine," with his three 
wise men, his "sad french greens" and his chinese cherries—gordon craig, so 
inclinational and unashamed—has carried 
the precept of being a good critic, to the last extreme; and burke is a 
psychologist—of acute, raccoon- 
like curiosity. summa diligentia; 
to the humbug, whose name is so amusing—very young and ve- 
ry rushed, caesar crossed the alps on the "top of a 
diligence." we are not daft about the meaning but this familiarity 
with wrong meanings puzzles one. humming- 
bug, the candles are not wired for electricity. 
small dog, going over the lawn, nipping the linen and saying 
that you have a badger—remember xenophon; 
only the most rudimentary sort of behavior necessary 
to put us on the scent; "a right good 
salvo of barks," a few "strong wrinkles" puckering the 
skin between the ears, are all we ask. 
when i buy pictures 
or what is closer to the truth, 
when i look at that of which i may regard myself as the imaginary possessor, 
i fix upon what would give me pleasure in my average moments: 
the satire upon curiosity in which no more is discernible than the intensity of the mood; 
or quite the opposite—the old thing, the medieval decorated hat-box, 
in which there are hounds with waists diminishing like the waist of the hourglass 
and deer and birds and seated people; 
it may be no more than a square of parquetry; the literal biography perhaps, 
in letters standing well apart upon a parchment-like expanse; 
an artichoke in six varieties of blue; the snipe-legged hieroglyphic in three parts; 
the silver fence protecting adam’s grave, or michael taking adam by the wrist. 
too stern an intellectual emphasis upon this quality or that, detracts from one’s enjoyment; 
it must not wish to disarm anything; nor may the approved triumph easily be honored— 
that which is great because something else is small. 
it comes to this: of whatever sort it is, 
it must be "lit with piercing glances into the life of things"; 
it must acknowledge the spiritual forces which have made it. 
a grave 
man looking into the sea, 
taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have to it yourself, 
it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing 
but you cannot stand in the middle of this: 
the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave. 
the firs stand in a procession, each with an emerald turkey-foot at the top, 
reserved as their contours, saying nothing; 
repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea; 
the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look. 
there are others besides you who have worn that look— 
whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them 
for their bones have not lasted: 
men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave, 
and row quickly away—the blades of the oars 
moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death. 
the wrinkles progress upon themselves in a phalanx—beautiful under networks of foam, 
and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed; 
the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting catcalls as heretofore— 
the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them 
and the ocean, under the pulsation of lighthouse and noise of bell-buoys, 
advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink— 
in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness. 
those various scalpels 
those 
various sounds consistently indistinct, like intermingled echoes 
struck from thin glasses successively at random—the 
inflection disguised: your hair, the tails of two fighting-cocks head to head in stone—like sculptured scimitars re- 
peating the curve of your ears in reverse order: your eyes, flowers of ice 
and 
snow sown by tearing winds on the cordage of disabled ships: your raised hand 
an ambiguous signature: your cheeks, those rosettes 
of blood on the stone floors of french châteaux, with regard to which the guides are so affirmative: 
your other hand 
a 
bundle of lances all alike, partly hid by emeralds from persia 
and the fractional magnificence of florentine 
goldwork—a collection of half a dozen little objects made fine 
with enamel in gray, yellow, and dragon fly blue; a lemon, a 
pear 
and three bunches of grapes, tied with silver: your dress, a magnificent square 
cathedral of uniform 
and at the same time, diverse appearance—a species of vertical vineyard rustling in the storm 
of conventional opinion. are they weapons or scalpels? whetted 
to 
brilliance by the hard majesty of that sophistication which is su- 
perior to opportunity, these things are rich 
instruments with which to experiment but surgery is not tentative. why dissect destiny with instruments which 
are more highly specialized than the tissues of destiny itself? 
new york 
the savage’s romance, 
accreted where we need the space for commerce— 
the center of the wholesale fur trade, 
starred with tepees of ermine and peopled with foxes, 
the long guard-hairs waving two inches beyond the body of the pelt; 
the ground dotted with deer-skins—white with white spots 
"as satin needlework in a single color may carry a varied pattern," 
and wilting eagles’ down compacted by the wind; 
and picardels of beaver skin; white ones alert with snow. 
it is a far cry from the "queen full of jewels" 
and the beau with the muff, 
from the gilt coach shaped like a perfume bottle, 
to the conjunction of the monongahela and the allegheny, 
and the scholastic philosophy of the wilderness 
to combat which one must stand outside and laugh 
since to go in is to be lost. 
it is not the dime-novel exterior, 
niagara falls, the calico horses and the war canoe; 
it is not that "if the fur is not finer than such as one sees others wear, 
one would rather be without it—" 
that estimated in raw meat and berries, we could feed the universe; 
it is not the atmosphere of ingenuity, 
the otter, the beaver, the puma skins 
without shooting-irons or dogs; 
it is not the plunder, 
it is the "accessibility to experience. 
people’s surroundings 
they answer one’s questions: 
a deal table compact with the wall; 
in this dried bone of arrangement, 
one’s "natural promptness" is compressed, not crowded out; 
one’s style is not lost in such simplicity: 
the palace furniture, so old fashioned, so old fashionable; 
sèvres china and the fireplace dogs— 
bronze dromios with pointed ears, as obsolete as pugs; 
one has one’s preference in the matter of bad furniture 
and this is not one’s choice: 
the vast indestructible necropolis 
of composite yawman-erbe separable units; 
the steel, the oak, the glass, the poor richard publications 
containing the public secrets of efficiency 
on "paper so thin that one thousand four hundred and twenty pages make one inch," 
exclaiming so to speak, when you take my time, you take something i had meant to use: 
the highway hid by fir trees in rhododendron twenty feet deep, 
the peacocks, hand-forged gates, old persian velvet— 
roses outlined in pale black on an ivory ground— 
the pierced iron shadows of the cedars, 
chinese carved glass, old waterford, 
lettered ladies; landscape gardening twisted into permanence: 
straight lines over such great distances as one finds in utah or in texas 
where people do not have to be told 
that "a good brake is as important as a good motor," 
where by means of extra sense cells in the skin, 
they can like trout, smell what is coming— 
those cool sirs with the explicit sensory apparatus of common sense, 
who know the exact distance between two points as the crow flies; 
there is something attractive about a mind that moves in a straight line— 
the municipal bat-roost of mosquito warfare, concrete statuary, 
medicaments for "instant beauty" in the hands of all, 
and that live wire, the american string quartet: 
and bluebeard’s tower above the coral reefs, 
the magic mousetrap closing on all points of the compass, 
capping like petrified surf, the furious azure of the bay 
where there is no dust and life is like a lemon-leaf, 
a green piece of tough translucent parchment, 
where the crimson, the copper, and the chinese vermilion of the poincianas 
set fire to the masonry and turquoise blues refute the clock; 
this dungeon with odd notions of hospitality, 
with its "chessmen carved out of moonstones," 
its mocking-birds, fringed lilies, and hibiscus, 
its black butterflies with blue half circles on their wings, 
tan goats with onyx ears, its lizards glittering and without thickness 
like splashes of fire and silver on the pierced turquoise of the lattices 
and the acacia-like lady shivering at the touch of a hand, 
lost in a small collision of the orchids— 
dyed quicksilver let fall 
to disappear like an obedient chameleon in fifty shades of mauve and amethyst: 
here where the mind of this establishment has come to the conclusion 
that it would be impossible to revolve about one’s self too much, 
sophistication has like "an escalator, cut the nerve of progress." 
in these noncommittal, personal-impersonal expressions of appearance, 
the eye knows what to skip; 
the physiognomy of conduct must not reveal the skeleton; 
"a setting must not have the air of being one" 
yet with x-raylike inquisitive intensity upon it, the surfaces go back; 
the interfering fringes of expression are but a stain on what stands out, 
there is neither up nor down to it; 
we see the exterior and the fundamental structure— 
captains of armies, cooks, carpenters, 
cutlers, gamesters, surgeons and armorers, 
lapidaries, silkmen, glovers, fiddlers and ballad-singers, 
sextons of churches, dyers of black cloth, hostlers and chimney-sweeps, 
queens, countesses, ladies, emperors, travelers and mariners, 
dukes, princes and gentlemen 
in their respective places— 
camps, forges and battlefields, 
conventions, oratories and wardrobes, 
dens, deserts, railway stations, asylums and places where engines are made, 
shops, prisons, brickyards and altars of churches— 
in magnificent places clean and decent, 
castles, palaces, dining-halls, theatres and imperial audience-chambers. 
snakes, mongooses, snake-charmers, and the like 
i have a friend who would give a price for those long fingers all of one length— 
those hideous bird’s claws, for that exotic asp and the mongoose— 
products of the country in which everything is hard work, the country of the grass-getter, 
the torch-bearer, the dog-servant, the message-bearer, the holy-man. 
engrossed in this distinguished worm nearly as wild and as fierce as the day it was captured, 
he gazes as if incapable of looking at anything with a view to analysis. 
"the slight snake rippling quickly through the grass, 
the leisurely tortoise with its pied back, 
the chameleon passing from twig to stone, from stone to straw," 
lit his imagination at one time; his admiration now converges upon this: 
thick, not heavy, it stands up from its traveling-basket, 
the essentially greek, the plastic animal, all of a piece from nose to tail; 
one is compelled to look at it as at the shadows of the alps 
imprisoning in their folds like flies in amber, the rhythms of the skating-rink. 
this animal to which from the earliest times, importance has attached, 
fine as its worshippers have said—for what was it invented? 
to show that when intelligence in its pure form 
has embarked on a train of thought which is unproductive, it will come back? 
we do not know; the only positive thing about it is its shape, but why protest? 
the passion for setting people right is in itself an afflictive disease. 
distaste which takes no credit to itself is best. 
bowls 
on the green 
with lignum vitae balls and ivory markers, 
the pins planted in wild duck formation, 
and quickly dispersed: 
by this survival of ancient punctilio 
in the manner of chinese lacquer carving, 
layer after layer exposed by certainty of touch and unhurried incision 
so that only so much color shall be revealed as is necessary to the picture 
i learn that we are precisians— 
not citizens of pompeii arrested in action 
as a cross section of one’s correspondence would seem to imply. 
renouncing a policy of boorish indifference 
to everything that has been said since the days of matilda, 
i shall purchase an etymological dictionary of modern english 
that i may understand what is written 
and like the ant and the spider 
returning from time to time to headquarters, 
shall answer the question 
as to "why i like winter better than i like summer" 
and acknowledge that it does not make me sick 
to look modern playwrights and poets and novelists straight in the face— 
that i feel just the same; 
and i shall write to the publisher of the magazine 
which will "appear the first day of the month 
and disappear before one has had time to buy it 
unless one takes proper precaution," 
and make an effort to please— 
since he who gives quickly gives twice 
in nothing so much as in a letter. 
novices 
anatomize their work 
in the sense in which will honeycomb was jilted by a duchess, 
the little assumptions of the scared ego confusing the issue 
so that they do not know "whether it is the buyer or the seller who gives the money"— 
an abstruse idea plain to none but the artist, 
the only seller who buys, and holds on to the money. 
because one expresses oneself and entitles it wisdom, one is not a fool. what an idea! 
"dracontine cockatrices, perfect and poisonous from the beginning," 
they present themselves as a contrast to sea-serpented regions "unlit by the half-lights of more conscious art." 
acquiring at thirty what at sixty they will be trying to forget, 
blind to the right word, deaf to satire 
which like "the smell of the cypress strengthens the nerves of the brain," 
averse from the antique 
with "that tinge of sadness about it which a reflective mind always feels, 
it is so little and so much"— 
they write the sort of thing that would in their judgment interest a lady; 
curious to know if we do not adore each letter of the alphabet that goes to make a word of it— 
according to the act of congress, the sworn statement of the treasurer and all the rest of it— 
the counterpart to what we are: 
stupid man; men are strong and no one pays any attention: 
stupid woman; women have charm and how annoying they can be. 
yes, "the authors are wonderful people, particularly those that write the most," 
the masters of all languages, the supertadpoles of expression. 
accustomed to the recurring phosphorescence of antiquity, 
the "much noble vagueness and indefinite jargon" of plato, 
the lucid movements of the royal yacht upon the learned scenery of egypt— 
king, steward, and harper seated amidships while the jade and the rock crystal course about in solution, 
their suavity surmounts the surf— 
the willowy wit, the transparent equation of isaiah, jeremiah, ezekiel, daniel. 
bored by "the detailless perspective of the sea," reiterative and naive, 
and its chaos of rocks—the stuffy remarks of the hebrews— 
the good and alive young men demonstrate the assertion 
that it is not necessary to be associated with that which has bored one; 
they have never made a statement which they found so easy to prove— 
"split like a glass against a wall" 
in this "precipitate of dazzling impressions, 
the spontaneous unforced passion of the hebrew language— 
an abyss of verbs full of reverberations and tempestuous energy," 
in which action perpetuates action and angle is at variance with angle 
till submerged by the general action; 
obscured by "fathomless suggestions of color," 
by incessantly panting lines of green, white with concussion, 
in this drama of water against rocks—this "ocean of hurrying consonants" 
with its "great livid stains like long slabs of green marble," 
its "flashing lances of perpendicular lightning" and "molten fires swallowed up," 
"with foam on its barriers," 
"crashing itself out in one long hiss of spray. 
marriage 
this institution, 
perhaps one should say enterprise 
out of respect for which 
one says one need not change one’s mind 
about a thing one has believed in, 
requiring public promises 
of one’s intention 
to fulfill a private obligation: 
i wonder what adam and eve 
think of it by this time, 
this firegilt steel 
alive with goldenness; 
how bright it shows— 
"of circular traditions and impostures, 
committing many spoils," 
requiring all one’s criminal ingenuity 
to avoid! 
psychology which explains everything 
explains nothing 
and we are still in doubt. 
eve: beautiful woman— 
i have seen her 
when she was so handsome 
she gave me a start, 
able to write simultaneously 
in three languages— 
english, german and french 
and talk in the meantime; 
equally positive in demanding a commotion 
and in stipulating quiet: 
"i should like to be alone"; 
to which the visitor replies, 
"i should like to be alone; 
why not be alone together?" 
below the incandescent stars 
below the incandescent fruit, 
the strange experience of beauty; 
its existence is too much; 
it tears one to pieces 
and each fresh wave of consciousness 
is poison. 
"see her, see her in this common world," 
the central flaw 
in that first crystal-fine experiment, 
this amalgamation which can never be more 
than an interesting impossibility, 
describing it 
as "that strange paradise 
unlike flesh, gold, or stately buildings, 
the choicest piece of my life: 
the heart rising 
in its estate of peace 
as a boat rises 
with the rising of the water"; 
constrained in speaking of the serpent— 
that shed snakeskin in the history of politeness 
not to be returned to again— 
that invaluable accident 
exonerating adam. 
and he has beauty also; 
it’s distressing—the o thou 
to whom, from whom, 
without whom nothing—adam; 
"something feline, 
something colubrine"—how true! 
a crouching mythological monster 
in that persian miniature of emerald mines, 
raw silk—ivory white, snow white, 
oyster white and six others— 
that paddock full of leopards and giraffes— 
long lemon-yellow bodies 
sown with trapezoids of blue. 
alive with words, 
vibrating like a cymbal 
touched before it has been struck, 
he has prophesied correctly— 
the industrious waterfall, 
"the speedy stream 
which violently bears all before it, 
at one time silent as the air 
and now as powerful as the wind." 
"treading chasms 
on the uncertain footing of a spear," 
forgetting that there is in woman 
a quality of mind 
which as an instinctive manifestation 
is unsafe, 
he goes on speaking 
in a formal, customary strain 
of "past states, the present state, 
seals, promises, 
the evil one suffered, 
the good one enjoys, 
hell, heaven, 
everything convenient 
to promote one’s joy." 
there is in him a state of mind 
by force of which, 
perceiving what it was not 
intended that he should, 
"he experiences a solemn joy 
in seeing that he has become an idol." 
plagued by the nightingale 
in the new leaves, 
with its silence— 
not its silence but its silences, 
he says of it: 
"it clothes me with a shirt of fire." 
"he dares not clap his hands 
to make it go on 
lest it should fly off; 
if he does nothing, it will sleep; 
if he cries out, it will not understand." 
unnerved by the nightingale 
and dazzled by the apple, 
impelled by "the illusion of a fire 
effectual to extinguish fire," 
compared with which 
the shining of the earth 
is but deformity—a fire 
"as high as deep as bright as broad 
as long as life itself," 
he stumbles over marriage, 
"a very trivial object indeed" 
to have destroyed the attitude 
in which he stood— 
the ease of the philosopher 
unfathered by a woman. 
unhelpful hymen! 
"a kind of overgrown cupid" 
reduced to insignificance 
by the mechanical advertising 
parading as involuntary comment, 
by that experiment of adam’s 
with ways out but no way in— 
the ritual of marriage, 
augmenting all its lavishness; 
its fiddle-head ferns, 
lotus flowers, opuntias, white dromedaries, 
its hippopotamus— 
nose and mouth combined 
in one magnificent hopper, 
"the crested screamer— 
that huge bird almost a lizard," 
its snake and the potent apple. 
he tells us 
that "for love 
that will gaze an eagle blind, 
that is like a hercules 
climbing the trees 
in the garden of the hesperides, 
from forty-five to seventy 
is the best age," 
commending it 
as a fine art, as an experiment, 
a duty or as merely recreation. 
one must not call him ruffian 
nor friction a calamity— 
the fight to be affectionate: 
"no truth can be fully known 
until it has been tried 
by the tooth of disputation." 
the blue panther with black eyes, 
the basalt panther with blue eyes, 
entirely graceful— 
one must give them the path— 
the black obsidian diana 
who "darkeneth her countenance 
as a bear doth, 
causing her husband to sigh," 
the spiked hand 
that has an affection for one 
and proves it to the bone, 
impatient to assure you 
that impatience is the mark of independence 
not of bondage. 
"married people often look that way"— 
"seldom and cold, up and down, 
mixed and malarial 
with a good day and bad." 
"when do we feed?" 
we occidentals are so unemotional, 
we quarrel as we feed; 
one’s self quite lost, 
the irony preserved 
in "the ahasuerus tête à tête banquet" 
with its "good monster, lead the way," 
with little laughter 
and munificence of humor 
in that quixotic atmosphere of frankness 
in which "four o’clock does not exist 
but at five o’clock 
the ladies in their imperious humility 
are ready to receive you"; 
in which experience attests 
that men have power 
and sometimes one is made to feel it. 
he says, "what monarch would not blush 
to have a wife 
with hair like a shaving-brush? 
the fact of woman 
is not ‘the sound of the flute 
but very poison." 
she says, "‘men are monopolists 
of stars, garters, buttons 
and other shining baubles’— 
unfit to be the guardians 
of another person’s happiness." 
he says, "these mummies 
must be handled carefully— 
‘the crumbs from a lion’s meal, 
a couple of shins and the bit of an ear’; 
turn to the letter m 
and you will find 
that ‘a wife is a coffin,’ 
that severe object 
with the pleasing geometry 
stipulating space and not people, 
refusing to be buried 
and uniquely disappointing, 
revengefully wrought in the attitude 
of an adoring child 
to a distinguished parent." 
she says, "this butterfly, 
this waterfly, this nomad 
that has ‘proposed 
to settle on my hand for life.’— 
what can one do with it? 
there must have been more time 
in shakespeare’s day 
to sit and watch a play. 
you know so many artists who are fools." 
he says, "you know so many fools 
who are not artists." 
the fact forgot 
that "some have merely rights 
while some have obligations," 
he loves himself so much, 
he can permit himself 
no rival in that love. 
she loves herself so much, 
she cannot see herself enough— 
a statuette of ivory on ivory, 
the logical last touch 
to an expansive splendor 
earned as wages for work done: 
one is not rich but poor 
when one can always seem so right. 
what can one do for them— 
these savages 
condemned to disaffect 
all those who are not visionaries 
alert to undertake the silly task 
of making people noble? 
this model of petrine fidelity 
who "leaves her peaceful husband 
only because she has seen enough of him"– 
that orator reminding you, 
"i am yours to command." 
"everything to do with love is mystery; 
it is more than a day’s work 
to investigate this science." 
one sees that it is rare— 
that striking grasp of opposites 
opposed each to the other, not to unity, 
which in cycloid inclusiveness 
has dwarfed the demonstration 
of columbus with the egg— 
a triumph of simplicity— 
that charitive euroclydon 
of frightening disinterestedness 
which the world hates, 
admitting: 
"i am such a cow, 
if i had a sorrow, 
i should feel it a long time; 
i am not one of those 
who have a great sorrow 
in the morning 
and a great joy at noon"; 
which says: "i have encountered it 
among those unpretentious 
protegés of wisdom, 
where seeming to parade 
as the debater and the roman, 
the statesmanship 
of an archaic daniel webster 
persists to their simplicity of temper 
as the essence of the matter: 
‘liberty and union 
now and forever’; 
the book on the writing-table; 
the hand in the breast-pocket. 
silence 
my father used to say, 
"superior people never make long visits, 
have to be shown longfellow’s grave 
nor the glass flowers at harvard. 
self reliant like the cat— 
that takes its prey to privacy, 
the mouse’s limp tail hanging like a shoelace from its mouth— 
they sometimes enjoy solitude, 
and can be robbed of speech 
by speech which has delighted them. 
the deepest feeling always shows itself in silence; 
not in silence, but restraint." 
nor was he insincere in saying, "‘make my house your inn.’" 
inns are not residences. 
an octopus 
of ice. deceptively reserved and flat, 
it lies "in grandeur and in mass" 
beneath a sea of shifting snow dunes; 
dots of cyclamen red and maroon on its clearly defined pseudopodia 
made of glass that will bend—a much needed invention— 
comprising twenty-eight ice fields from fifty to five hundred feet thick, 
of unimagined delicacy. 
"picking periwinkles from the cracks" 
or killing prey with the concentric crushing rigor of the python, 
it hovers forward "spider fashion 
on its arms" misleadingly like lace; 
its "ghostly pallor changing 
to the green metallic tinge of an anemone starred pool." 
the fir trees in "the magnitude of their root systems," 
rise aloof from these maneuvers "creepy to behold," 
austere specimens of our american royal families, 
"each like the shadow of the one beside it. 
the rock seems frail compared with their dark energy of life," 
its vermilion and onyx and manganese blue interior expensiveness 
left at the mercy of the weather; 
"stained transversely by iron where the water drips down," 
recognized by its plants and its animals. 
completing a circle, 
you have been deceived into thinking that you have progressed, 
under the polite needles of the larches 
"hung to filter not to intercept the sunlight"— 
met by tightly wattled spruce twigs 
"conformed to an edge like clipped cypress 
as if no branch could penetrate the cold beyond its company"; 
and dumps of gold and silver ore enclosing the goat’s mirror— 
that lady-fingerlike depression in the shape of the left human foot, 
which prejudices you in favor of itself 
before you have had time to see the others; 
its indigo, pea-green, blue-green, and turquoise, 
from a hundred to two hundred feet deep, 
"merging in irregular patches in the middle lake 
where like gusts of a storm 
obliterating the shadows of the fir trees, the wind makes lanes of ripples." 
what spot could have merits of equal importance 
for bears, elk, deer, wolves, goats, and ducks? 
preempted by their ancestors, 
this is the property of the exacting porcupine, 
and of the rat "slipping along to its burrow in the swamp 
or pausing on high ground to smell the heather"; 
of "thoughtful beavers 
making drains which seem the work of careful men with shovels," 
and of the bears inspecting unexpectedly 
ant hills and berry bushes. 
composed of calcium gems and alabaster pillars, 
topaz, tourmaline crystals and amethyst quartz, 
their den is somewhere else, concealed in the confusion 
of "blue forests thrown together with marble and jasper and agate 
as if whole quarries had been dynamited." 
and farther up, in stag-at-bay position 
as a scintillating fragment of these terrible stalagmites, 
stands the goat, 
its eye fixed on the waterfall which never seems to fall— 
an endless skein swayed by the wind, 
immune to force of gravity in the perspective of the peaks. 
a special antelope 
acclimated to "grottoes from which issue penetrating draughts 
which make you wonder why you came," 
it stands its ground 
on cliffs the color of the clouds, of petrified white vapor— 
black feet, eyes, nose, and horns engraved on dazzling ice-fields, 
the ermine body on the crystal peak; 
the sun kindling its shoulders to maximum heat like acetylene, dyeing them white— 
upon this antique pedestal— 
"a mountain with those graceful lines which prove it a volcano," 
its top a complete cone like fujiyama’s 
till an explosion blew it off. 
maintaining many minds, distinguished by a beauty 
of which "the visitor dare never fully speak at home 
for fear of being stoned as an imposter," 
big snow mountain is the home of a diversity of creatures: 
those who "have lived in hotels 
but who now live in camps—who prefer to"; 
the mountain guide evolving from the trapper, 
"in two pairs of trousers, the outer one older, 
wearing slowly away from the feet to the knees"; 
"the nine-striped chipmunk 
running with unmammallike agility along a log"; 
the water ouzel 
with "its passion for rapids and high pressured falls," 
building under the arch of some tiny niagara; 
the white-tailed ptarmigan "in winter solid white, 
feeding on heather bells and alpine buckwheat"; 
and the eleven eagles of the west, 
"fond of the spring fragrance and the winter colors," 
used to the unegoistic action of the glaciers 
and "several hours of frost every midsummer night." 
"they make a nice appearance, don’t they," 
happy seeing nothing? 
perched on treacherous lava and pumice— 
those unadjusted chimney-pots and cleavers 
which stipulate "the names and addresses of persons to notify 
in case of disaster—" 
they hear the roar of ice and supervise the water 
winding slowly through the cliffs, 
the road "climbing like the thread 
which forms the groove around a snail-shell, 
doubling back and forth until where snow begins, it ends." 
no "deliberate wide-eyed wistfulness" is here 
among the boulders sunk in ripples and white water 
where "when you hear the best wild music of the mountains it is sure to be a marmot," 
the victim on some slight observatory, 
of "a struggle between curiosity and caution," 
inquiring what has scared it: 
a stone from the moraine descending in leaps, 
another marmot, or the spotted ponies with "glass eyes," 
brought up on frosty grass and flowers 
and rapid draughts of ice water. 
instructed none knows how, to climb the mountain, 
by "business men who as totemic scenery of canada, 
require for recreation, 
three hundred and sixty-five holidays in the year," 
these conspicuously spotted little horses are peculiar; 
hard to discern among the birch trees, ferns, and lily pads, 
avalanche lilies, indian paintbrushes, 
bears’ ears and kittentails, 
and miniature cavalcades of chlorophylless fungi 
magnified in profile on the moss beds like moonstones in the water; 
the cavalcade of calico competing 
with the original american "menagerie of styles" 
among the white flowers of the rhododendron surmounting rigid leaves 
upon which moisture works its alchemy, 
transmuting verdure into onyx. 
larkspur, blue pincushions, blue peas, and lupin; 
white flowers with white, and red with red; 
the blue ones "growing close together 
so that patches of them look like blue water in the distance": 
this arrangement of colors 
as in persian designs of hard stones with enamel, 
forms a pleasing equation— 
a diamond outside and inside, a white dot; 
on the outside, a ruby; inside, a red dot; 
black spots balanced with black 
in the woodlands where fires have run over the ground— 
separated by aspens, cat’s paws, and woolly sunflowers, 
fireweed, asters, and goliath thistles 
"flowering at all altitudes as multiplicitous as barley," 
like pink sapphires in the pavement of the glistening plateau. 
inimical to "bristling, puny, swearing men 
equipped with saws and axes," 
this treacherous glass mountain 
admires gentians, lady’s slippers, harebells, mountain dryads, 
and "calypso, the goat flower— 
that greenish orchid fond of snow"— 
anomalously nourished upon shelving glacial ledges 
where climbers have not gone or have gone timidly, 
"the one resting his nerves while the other advanced," 
on this volcano with the blue jay, her principal companion. 
"hopping stiffly on sharp feet" like miniature icehacks— 
"secretive, with a look of wisdom and distinction, but a villain, 
fond of human society or the crumbs that go with it," 
he knows no greek, 
"that pride producing language," 
in which "rashness is rendered innocuous, and error exposed 
by the collision of knowledge with knowledge." 
"like happy souls in hell," enjoying mental difficulties, 
the grasshoppers of greece 
amused themselves with delicate behavior 
because it was "so noble and so fair"; 
not practiced in adapting their intelligence 
to eagle traps and snowshoes, 
to alpenstocks and other toys contrived by those 
"alive to the advantage of invigorating pleasures." 
bows, arrows, oars, and paddles for which trees provide the wood, 
in new countries are more eloquent than elsewhere— 
augmenting evidence for the assertion 
that essentially humane, 
"the forest affords wood for dwellings and by its beauty stimulates 
the moral vigor of its citizens." 
the greeks liked smoothness, distrusting what was back 
of what could not be clearly seen, 
resolving with benevolent conclusiveness, 
"complexities which still will be complexities 
as long as the world lasts"; 
ascribing what we clumsily call happiness, 
to "an accident or a quality, 
a spiritual substance or the soul itself, 
an act, a disposition, or a habit, 
or a habit infused to which the soul has been persuaded, 
or something distinct from a habit, a power—" 
such power as adam had and we are still devoid of. 
"emotionally sensitive, their hearts were hard"; 
their wisdom was remote 
from that of these odd oracles of cool official sarcasm, 
upon this game preserve 
where "guns, nets, seines, traps and explosives, 
hired vehicles, gambling and intoxicants are prohibited, 
disobedient persons being summarily removed 
and not allowed to return without permission in writing." 
it is self evident 
that it is frightful to have everything afraid of one; 
that one must do as one is told 
and eat "rice, prunes, dates, raisins, hardtack, and tomatoes" 
if one would "conquer the main peak" of mount tacoma 
this fossil flower concise without a shiver, 
intact when it is cut, 
damned for its sacrosanct remoteness— 
like henry james "damned by the public for decorum"; 
not decorum, but restraint; 
it was the love of doing hard things 
that rebuffed and wore them out—a public out of sympathy with neatness. 
neatness of finish! neatness of finish! 
relentless accuracy is the nature of this octopus 
with its capacity for fact. 
"creeping slowly as with meditated stealth, 
its arms seeming to approach from all directions," 
it receives one under winds that "tear the snow to bits 
and hurl it like a sandblast, 
shearing off twigs and loose bark from the trees." 
is tree the word for these strange things 
"flat on the ground like vines"; 
some "bent in a half circle with branches on one side 
suggesting dustbrushes, not trees; 
some finding strength in union, forming little stunted groves, 
their flattened mats of branches shrunk in trying to escape" 
from the hard mountain "planed by ice and polished by the wind"— 
the white volcano with no weather side; 
the lightning flashing at its base, 
rain falling in the valleys, and snow falling on the peak— 
the glassy octopus symmetrically pointed, 
its claw cut by the avalanche 
"with a sound like the crack of a rifle, 
in a curtain of powdered snow launched like a waterfall. 
sea unicorns and land unicorns 
with their respective lions— 
"mighty monoceroses with immeasured tayles"— 
these are those very animals 
described by the cartographers of 1539, 
defiantly revolving 
in such a way that the hard steel 
in the long keel of white exhibited in tumbling, 
disperses giant weeds 
and those sea snakes whose forms looped in the foam, "disquiet shippers." 
not ignorant of how a voyager obtained the horn of a sea unicorn 
to give queen elizabeth 
who thought it worth a hundred thousand pounds, 
they persevere in swimming where they like, 
finding the place where lions live in herds, 
strewn on the beach like stones with lesser stones— 
and bears are white; 
discovering antarctica, its penguin kings and icy spires, 
and sir john hawkins’ florida 
"abounding in land unicorns and lions, 
since where the one is, 
its arch enemy cannot be missing." 
thus personalities by nature much opposed, 
can be combined in such a way 
that when they do agree, their unanimity is great, 
"in politics, in trade, law, sport, religion, 
china collecting, tennis, and church going." 
you have remarked this fourfold combination of strange animals, 
upon embroideries, 
enwrought with "polished garlands" of agreeing indifference— 
thorns, "myrtle rods, and shafts of bay," 
"cobwebs, and knotts, and mulberries" 
of lapis lazuli and pomegranate and malachite— 
britannia’s sea unicorn with its rebellious child 
now ostentatiously indigenous of the new english coast 
and its land lion oddly tolerant of those pacific counterparts to it, 
the water lions of the west. 
this is a strange fraternity—these sea lions and land lions, 
land unicorns and sea unicorns: 
the lion civilly rampant, 
tame and concessive like the long-tailed bear of ecuador— 
the lion standing up against this screen of woven air 
which is the forest: 
the unicorn also, on its hind legs in reciprocity. 
a puzzle to the hunters, is this haughtiest of beasts, 
to be distinguished from those born without a horn, 
in use like saint jerome’s tame lion, as domestics, 
rebelling proudly at the dogs 
which are dismayed by the chain lightning 
playing at them from its horn— 
the dogs persistent in pursuit of it as if it could be caught, 
"deriving agreeable terror" from its "moonbeam throat" 
on fire like its white coat and unconsumed as if of salamander’s skin. 
so wary as to disappear for centuries and reappear, 
yet never to be caught, 
the unicorn has been preserved 
by an unmatched device 
wrought like the work of expert blacksmiths, 
with which nothing can compare— 
this animal of that one horn 
throwing itself upon which head foremost from a cliff, 
it walks away unharmed, 
proficient in this feat, which like herodotus, 
i have not seen except in pictures. 
thus this strange animal with its miraculous elusiveness, 
has come to be unique, 
"impossible to take alive," 
tamed only by a lady inoffensive like itself— 
as curiously wild and gentle; 
"as straight and slender as the crest, 
or antlet of the one-beam’d beast." 
upon the printed page, 
also by word of mouth, 
we have a record of it all 
and how, unfearful of deceit, 
etched like an equine monster on an old celestial map, 
beside a cloud or dress of virgin-mary blue, 
improved "all over slightly with snakes of venice gold, 
and silver, and some o’s," 
the unicorn "with pavon high," approaches eagerly; 
until engrossed by what appears of this strange enemy, 
upon the map, "upon her lap," 
its "mild wild head doth lie. 
the steeple-jack 
dürer would have seen a reason for living 
in a town like this, with eight stranded whales 
to look at; with the sweet sea air coming into your house 
on a fine day, from water etched 
with waves as formal as the scales 
on a fish. 
one by one, in two’s, in three’s, the seagulls keep 
flying back and forth over the town clock, 
or sailing around the lighthouse without moving the wings— 
rising steadily with a slight 
quiver of the body—or flock 
mewing where 
a sea the purple of the peacock’s neck is 
paled to greenish azure as dürer changed 
the pine green of the tyrol to peacock blue and guinea 
grey. you can see a twenty-five 
pound lobster; and fishnets arranged 
to dry. the 
whirlwind fifeanddrum of the storm bends the salt 
marsh grass, disturbs stars in the sky and the 
star on the steeple; it is a privilege to see so 
much confusion. disguised by what 
might seem austerity, the seaside 
flowers and 
trees are favored by the fog so that you have 
the tropics at first hand: the trumpet-vine, 
fox-glove, giant snap-dragon, a salpiglossis that has 
spots and stripes; morning-glories, gourds, 
or moon-vines trained on fishing-twine 
at the back 
door; cat-tails, flags, blueberries and spiderwort, 
striped grass, lichens, sunflowers, asters, daisies— 
the yellow and the crab-claw blue ones with green bracts—toad-plant, 
petunias, ferns; pink lilies, blue 
ones, tigers; poppies; black sweet-peas. 
the climate 
is not right for the banyan, frangipani, the 
jack-fruit tree; nor for exotic serpent 
life. ring lizard and snake-skin for the foot if you see fit, 
but here they’ve cats not cobras to 
keep down the rats. the diffident 
little newt 
with white pin-dots on black horizontal spaced 
out bands lives here; yet there is nothing that 
ambition can buy or take away. the college student 
named ambrose sits on the hill-side 
with his not-native books and hat 
and sees boats 
at sea progress white and rigid as if in 
a groove. liking an elegance of which 
the source is not bravado, he knows by heart the antique 
sugar-bowl shaped summer-house of 
interlacing slats, and the pitch 
of the church 
spire, not true, from which a man in scarlet lets 
down a rope as a spider spins a thread; 
he might be part of a novel, but on the sidewalk a 
sign says c. j. poole, steeple-jack, 
in black and white; and one in red 
and white says 
danger. the church portico has four fluted 
columns, each a single piece of stone, made 
modester by white-wash. this would be a fit haven for 
waifs, children, animals, prisoners, 
and presidents who have repaid 
sin-driven 
senators by not thinking about them. there 
are a school-house, a post-office in a 
store, fish-houses, hen-houses, a three-masted schooner on 
the stocks. the hero, the student, 
the steeple-jack, each in his way, 
is at home. 
it could not be dangerous to be living 
in a town like this, of simple people, 
who have a steeple-jack placing danger signs by the church 
while he is gilding the solidpointed 
star, which on a steeple 
stands for hope. 
the student 
in america everybody must have a degree," the french man 
says, "but the french do not think that all can have it; they don’t 
say everyone must go to college." we 
may feel as he says we do; five kinds of superiority 
might be unattainable by all, but one degree is not too much. 
in each school there is a pair of fruit-trees like that twin tree 
in every other school: tree-of-knowledge— 
tree-of-life—each with a label like that of the other college: 
lux, or lux et veritas, christo et ecclesiae, sapiet 
felici, and if science confers immortality, 
these apple-trees should be for everyone. 
oriental arbor vitae we say lightly. yet you pardon 
it as when one thinking of the navy does not know not to infer 
dishonorable discharge from a d. d. it is a 
thoughtful pupil has two thoughts for the word 
valet; or for bachelor, child, damsel; though no one having heard 
them used as terms of chivalry would make the medieval use of 
them. secluded from domestic strife, jack bookworm led a 
college life says goldsmith. he might not say 
it of the student who shows interest in the stranger’s resumé 
by asking "when will your experiment be finished, doctor einstein?" 
and is pleased when doctor einstein smiles and says politely 
"science is never finished." but we’re not 
hypocrites, we’re rustics. the football huddle in the vacant lot 
is impersonating calculus and physics and military 
books; and is gathering the data for genetics. if 
scholarship would profit by it, sixteenfoot 
men should be grown; it’s for the football men to say. we must lean 
on their experience. there is vitality in the world of sport. 
if it is not the tree of knowledge, it’s the tree of life. 
when audubon adopted us he taught 
us how to dance. it was the great crab-flounder of montana caught 
and changed from that which creeps to that which is angelic. he taught us how 
to turn as the airport wind-sock turns without an error; 
like alligator, downpour, dynamite, 
and wotan, gliding round the course in a fast neat school, with the white 
of the eye showing; or as sea-lions keep going round and round the 
pool. but there is more to learn—the difference between cow 
and zebu; lion, tiger; barred and brown 
owls; horned owls have one ear that opens up and one that opens down. 
the golden eagle is the one with feathered legs. the penguin wing is 
ancient, not degenerate. swordfish are different from 
gars, if one may speak of gars when the big 
gamehunters are using the fastidious singular—say pig, 
and that they have seen camelsparrow, tigerhorse, rat, mouse, butterfly, 
snake, elephant, fruit-bat, et cet’ra. no fact of science— 
theology or biology—might 
not as well be known; one does not care to hold opinions that fright 
could dislocate. education augments our natural forces and 
prompts us to extend the machinery of advantage 
to those who are without it. one fitted 
to be a scholar must have the heroic mind, emerson said. 
the student concentrates and does not like to fight; "gives his opinion 
firmly and rests on it"—in the manner of the poet; 
is reclusive, and reserved; and has such 
ways, not because he has no feeling but because he has so much. 
boasting provokes jibes, and in this country we’ve no cause to boast; we are 
as a nation perhaps, undergraduates not students. 
but anyone who studies will advance. 
are we to grow up or not? they are not all college boys in france. 
no swan so fine 
"no water so still as the 
dead fountains of versailles." no swan, 
with swart blind look askance 
and gondoliering legs, so fine 
as the chintz china one with fawn- 
brown eyes and toothed gold 
collar on to show whose bird it was. 
lodged in the louis fifteenth 
candelabrum-tree of cockscomb- 
tinted buttons, dahlias, 
sea-urchins, and everlastings, 
it perches on the branching foam 
of polished sculptured 
flowers—at ease and tall. the king is dead. 
too much 
a roman hired an 
artist, a freedman, 
to make a cone—pine-cone 
or fir-cone—with holes for a fountain. placed on 
the prison of st. angelo, this cone 
of the pompeys which is known 
now as the popes’, passed 
for art. a huge cast 
bronze, dwarfing the peacock 
statue in the garden of the vatican, 
it looks like a work of art made to give 
to a pompey, or native 
of thebes. others could 
build, and understood 
making colossi and 
how to use slaves, and kept crocodiles and put 
baboons on the necks of giraffes to pick 
fruit, and used serpent magic. 
they had their men tie 
hippopotami 
and bring out dapple dogcats 
to course antelopes, dikdik, and ibex; 
or used small eagles. they looked on as theirs, 
impalas and onagers, 
the wild ostrich herd 
with hard feet and bird 
necks rearing back in the 
dust like a serpent preparing to strike, cranes, 
storks, anoas, mongooses, and nile geese. 
and there were gardens for these— 
combining planes, dates, 
limes, and pomegranates, 
in avenues—with square 
pools of pink flowers, tame fish, and small frogs. besides 
yarns dyed with indigo, and red cotton, 
they had a flax which they spun 
into fine linen 
cordage for yachtsmen. 
these people liked small things; 
they gave to boys little paired playthings such as 
nests of eggs, ichneumon and snake, paddle 
and raft, badger and camel; 
and made toys for them- 
selves: the royal totem; 
and toilet-boxes marked 
with the contents. lords and ladies put goose-grease 
paint in round bone boxes with pivoting 
lid incised with the duck-wing 
or reverted duck- 
head; kept in a buck 
or rhinoceros horn, 
the ground horn; and locust oil in stone locusts. 
it was a picture with a fine distance; 
of drought, and of assistance 
in time, from the nile 
rising slowly, while 
the pig-tailed monkey on 
slab-hands, with arched-up slack-slung gait, and the brown 
dandy, looked at the jasmine two-leafed twig 
and bud, cactus-pads, and fig. 
dwarfs here and there, lent 
to an evident 
poetry of frog grays, 
duck-egg greens, and egg-plant blues, a fantasy 
and a verisimilitude that were 
right to those with, everywhere, 
power over the poor. 
the bees’ food is your 
food. those who tended flowerbeds 
and stables were like the king’s cane in the 
form of a hand, or the folding bedroom 
made for his mother of whom 
he was fond. princes 
clad in queens’ dresses 
calla or petunia 
white that trembled at the edge, and queens in a 
king’s underskirt of fine-twilled thread like silk- 
worm gut, as bee-man and milk- 
maid, kept divine cows 
and bees; limestone brows, 
and gold-foil wings. they made 
basalt serpents and portraits of beetles; the 
king gave his name to them and he was named 
for them. he feared snakes and tamed 
pharaoh’s rat, the rust- 
backed mongoose. no bust 
of it was made, but there 
was pleasure for the rat. its restlessness was 
its excellence; it was praised for its wit; 
and the jerboa, like it, 
a small desert rat, 
and not famous, that 
lives without water, has 
happiness. abroad seeking food, or at home 
in its burrow, the sahara field-mouse 
has a shining silver house 
of sand. o rest and 
joy, the boundless sand, 
the stupendous sand-spout, 
no water, no palm-trees, no ivory bed, 
tiny cactus; but one would not be he 
who has nothing but plenty. 
in costa rica 
in blazing driftwood 
the green keeps showing at the same place; 
as, intermittently, the fire-opal shows blue and green. 
in costa rica the true chinese lizard face 
is found, of the amphibious falling dragon, the living firework. 
he leaps and meets his 
likeness in the stream and, king with king, 
helped by his three-part plume along the back, runs on two legs, 
tail dragging; faints upon the air; then with a spring 
dives to the stream-bed, hiding as the chieftain with gold body hid in 
guatavita lake. 
he runs, he flies, he swims, to get to 
his basilica—"the ruler of rivers, lakes, and seas, 
invisible or visible," with clouds to do 
as bid—and can be "long or short, and also coarse or fine at pleasure." with a 
modest quiver, he 
ascends the bank on clinging tree-frog 
hands, and waits; the water draining, forms a lizard there, from 
skin now looking a little newer than the log 
it rested on & the thick mass of verdure all about. this is the 
feather basilisk 
of travelers’ tales, of which a pair stood 
bodyguard beside confucius’ crib: aquatic flying 
lizard-fairy detested by such dragonhood 
as michael fought. one has seen animals like his, though smaller, collide 
and fight, brother matched 
with brother, as if immune to pain; 
push, struggle and breathe hard; swell out and muster strength, withdraw, 
advance; and swerving, almost fall—hoping to gain 
the mortal hold and that some fang should pierce the marrow. but when plumet 
territories touch, 
the masters of them are dramatic 
without shedding blood, exerting charm as chinese dragonwhiskers 
in a crystal handle charm; or as thickflowering 
orchids gather dragons, in the east, by forming clouds for them. 
the malay dragon 
we have ours; and they 
have theirs. ours has a skin feather crest; 
theirs has wings out from the waist which is snuff-brown or sallow. 
ours falls from trees on water; theirs is the smallest 
dragon that knows how to dive head-first from a tree-top to something dry. 
floating on spread ribs, 
the boat-like body settles on the 
clamshell-tinted spray sprung from the nutmeg-tree—minute legs 
trailing half akimbo—the true divinity 
of malay. among unfragrant orchids, on the unnutritious nut 
tree, myristica 
fragrans, the harmless god spreads ribs that 
do not raise a hood. this is the serpent-dove peculiar 
to the east; that lives as the butterfly or bat 
can, in a brood, conferring wings on what it grasps, as the air-plant does. 
the tuatera 
elsewhere, sea lizards— 
congregated so there is not room 
to step, with tails laid criss-cross, alligator-style, among 
birds toddling in and out—are innocent of whom 
they neighbor. bird-reptile social life is pleasing. the tuatera 
will tolerate a 
petrel in its den, and lays ten eggs 
or nine—the number laid by dragons since "a true dragon 
has nine sons." the frilled lizard, the kind with no legs, 
and the three-horned chameleon, are non-serious ones that take to flight 
if you do not. in 
copenhagen the principal door 
of the bourse is roofed by two pairs of dragons standing on 
their heads—twirled by the architect—so that the four 
green tails conspiring upright, symbolize four-fold security. now, 
the frigate pelican 
rapidly cruising or lying on the air there is a bird 
that realizes rasselas’s friend’s project 
of wings uniting levity with strength. this 
hell-diver, frigate-bird, hurricane- 
bird; unless swift is the proper word 
for him, the storm omen when 
he flies close to the waves, should be seen 
fishing, although oftener 
he appears to prefer 
to take, on the wing, from industrious cruder-winged species 
the fish they have caught, and is seldom successless. 
a marvel of grace, no matter how fast his 
victim may fly or how often may 
turn, the dishonest pelican’s ease 
in pursuit, bears him away 
with the fish that the badgered bird drops. 
a kind of superlative 
swallow, that likes to live 
on food caught while flying, he is not a pelican. the toe 
with slight web, air-boned body, and very long wings 
with the spread of a swan’s—duplicating a 
bow-string as he floats overhead—feel 
the changing v-shaped scissor swallow- 
tail direct the rigid keel. 
and steering beak to windward always, 
the fleetest foremost fairy 
among birds, outflies the 
aeroplane which cannot flap its wings nor alter any quill- 
tip. for him, the feeling in a hand, in fins, is 
in his unbent downbent crafty oar. with him 
other pelicans aimlessly soar 
as he does; separating, until 
not flapping they rise once more, 
closing in without looking and move 
outward again to the top 
of the circle and stop 
and blow back, allowing the wind to reverse their direction. 
this is not the stalwart swan that can ferry the 
woodcutter’s two children home; no. make hay; keep 
the shop; i have one sheep; were a less 
limber animal’s mottoes. this one 
finds sticks for the swan’s-down dress 
of his child to rest upon and would 
not know gretel from hänsel. 
as impassioned handel— 
meant for a lawyer and a masculine german domestic 
career—clandestinely studied the harpsichord 
and never was known to have fallen in love, 
the unconfiding frigate-bird hides 
in the height and in the majestic 
display of his art. he glides 
a hundred feet or quivers about 
as charred paper behaves—full 
of feints; and an eagle 
of vigilance, earns the term aquiline; keeping at a height 
so great the feathers look black and the beak does not 
show. it is not retreat but exclusion from 
which he looks down and observes what went 
secretly, as it thought, out of sight 
among dense jungle plants. sent 
ahead of the rest, there goes the true 
knight in his jointed coat that 
covers all but his bat 
ears; a-trot, with stiff pig gait—our tame armadillo, loosed by 
his master and as pleased as a dog. beside the 
spattered blood—that orchid which the native fears— 
the fer-de-lance lies sleeping; centaur- 
like, this harmful couple’s amity 
is apropos. a jaguar 
and crocodile are fighting. sharp-shinned 
hawks and peacock-freckled small 
cats, like the literal 
merry-go-round, come wandering within the circular view 
of the high bird for whom from the air they are ants 
keeping house all their lives in the crack of a 
crag with no view from the top. and here, 
unlikely animals learning to 
dance, crouch on two steeds that rear 
behind a leopard with a frantic 
face, tamed by an artemis 
who wears a dress like his, 
and hampering haymaker’s hat. festina lente. be gay 
civilly. how so? "if i do well i am blessed 
whether any bless me or not, and if i do 
ill i am cursed." we watch the moon rise 
on the susquehanna. in his way 
this most romantic bird, flies 
to a more mundane place, the mangrove 
swamp, to sleep. he wastes the moon. 
but he, and others, soon 
rise from the bough, and though flying are able to foil the tired 
moment of danger, that lays on heart and lungs the 
weight of the python that crushes to powder. 
the tune’s illiterate footsteps fail; 
the steam hacks are not to be admired. 
these, unturbulent, avail 
themselves of turbulence to fly—pleased 
with the faint wind’s varyings, 
on which to spread fixed wings. 
the reticent lugubrious ragged immense minuet 
descending to leeward, ascending to windward 
again without flapping, in what seems to be 
a way of resting, are now nearer, 
but as seemingly bodiless yet 
as they were. theirs are somber 
quills for so wide and lightboned a bird 
as the frigate pelican 
of the caribbean. 
the buffalo 
black in blazonry means 
prudence; and niger, unpropitious. might 
hematite- 
black incurved compact horns on a bison 
have significance? the 
soot brown tail-tuft on 
a kind of lion- 
tail; what would that express? 
and john steuart curry’s ajax pulling 
grass—no ring 
in his nose—two birds standing on his back? 
though prints like this cannot 
show if they were black 
birds, nor the color 
of the back. the modern 
ox does not look like the augsburg ox’s 
portrait. yes, 
the great extinct wild aurochs was a beast 
to paint, with stripe and sixfoot 
horn-spread—decreased 
to siamese-cat- 
brown swiss size, or zebu 
shape with white plush dewlap and warm-blooded 
hump; to red- 
skinned hereford or to piebald holstein. yet 
some would say the sparse-haired 
buffalo has met 
human notions best— 
unlike the elephant, 
both jewel and jeweler in the hairs 
that he wears— 
no white-nosed vermont ox yoked with its twin 
to haul the maple sap, 
up to their knees in 
snow; no freakishly 
over-drove ox drawn by 
rowlandson, but the indian buffalo, 
albino- 
footed, standing in the mud-lake, with a 
day’s work to do. no white 
christian heathen, waylaid 
by the buddha, 
serves him so well as the 
buffalo—as mettlesome as if check- 
reined—free neck 
stretching out, and snake-tail in a half twist 
on the flank; nor will so 
cheerfully assist 
the sage sitting with 
feet at the same side, to 
dismount at the shrine; nor are there any 
ivory 
tusks like those two horns which when a tiger 
coughs, are lowered fiercely 
and convert the fur 
to harmless rubbish. 
the indian buffalo, 
led by bare-leggèd herd-boys to a hay 
hut where they 
stable it, need not fear comparison 
with bison, with the twins, 
nor with anyone 
of ox ancestry. 
nine nectarines and other porcelain 
arranged by two’s as peaches are, 
at intervals that all may live— 
eight and a single one, on twigs that 
grew the year before—they look like 
a derivative; 
although not uncommonly 
the opposite is seen— 
nine peaches on a nectarine. 
fuzzless through slender crescent leaves 
of green or blue—or both, 
in the chinese style—the four 
pairs’ half-moon leaf-mosaic turns 
out to the sun the sprinkled blush 
of puce-american-beauty pink 
applied to beeswax gray by the 
unenquiring brush 
of mercantile bookbinding. 
like the peach yu, the red- 
cheeked peach which cannot aid the dead, 
but eaten in time prevents death, 
the italian peachnut, 
persian plum, ispahan 
secluded wall-grown nectarine, 
as wild spontaneous fruit was 
found in china first. but was it wild? 
prudent de candolle would not say. 
we cannot find flaws 
in this emblematic group 
of nine, with leaf window 
unquilted by curculio— 
which someone once depicted on 
this much-mended plate; or 
in the also accurate 
unantlered moose, or iceland horse, 
or ass, asleep against the old 
thick, low-leaning nectarine that is the 
color of the shrub-tree’s brownish 
flower. from manifold 
small boughs, productive as the 
magic willow that grew 
above the mother’s grave and threw 
on cinderella what she wished, 
a bat is winging. it 
is a moonlight scene, bringing 
the animal so near, its eyes 
are separate from the face—mere 
delicately drawn gray discs, out from 
itself in space. imperial 
happiness lives here 
on the peaches of long life 
that make it permanent. 
a fungus could have meant 
long life; a crane, a stork, a dove. 
china, with flowers and birds 
and half-beasts, became the land 
of the best china-making first. 
hunts and domestic scenes occur 
in france on dinner-plates, signed on the 
back with a two-finned fish; england 
has an officer 
in jack-boots seated in a 
bosquet, the cow, the flock 
of sheep, the pheasant, the peacock 
sweeping near with lifted claw; the 
skilled peonian rose 
and the rosebud that began 
with william billingsley (once poor, 
like a monkey on a dolphin, tossed 
by ocean, mighty monster) until 
josiah spode adopted him. 
yet with the gold-glossed 
serpent handles, are there green 
cocks with "brown beaks and cheeks 
and dark blue combs" and mammal freaks 
that, like the chinese certainties 
and sets of precious things, 
dare to be conspicuous? 
theirs is a race that "understands 
the spirit of the wilderness" 
and the nectarine-loving kylin 
of pony appearance—the long- 
tailed or the tailless 
small cinnamon-brown common 
camel-haired unicorn 
with antelope feet and no horn, 
here enamelled on porcelain. 
it was a chinese who 
imagined this masterpiece. 
pigeons 
older than the ancient greeks, than 
solomon, the pigeon family is a 
ramifying one, a 
banyan of banyans; to begin 
with, bluish slate, 
but with ability. modesty cannot dull 
the lustre of the pigeon 
swift and sure, coming quickest and 
straightest just after a storm. the great 
lame war hero cher ami, the 
lost battalion’s gallant bird; and 
mocker with one eye 
destroyed, delivering his dispatch 
to his superiors; and sergeant dunn, 
civilian pigeon who flew eight 
hundred sixty-eight miles 
in four days and six hours; 
and destined to hatch 
in france, spike, veteran of 
the division in which mocker 
served—exceptional messenger. 
"rarely was confidence misplaced" a newspaper 
says. dastardly comment 
inexactly phrased, as used of her- 
mes, ariel, or leander— 
pigeons of the past. neither was confidence 
misplaced in the javan- 
sumatran birds the dutch had had 
brought from baghdad. 
mysterious animal with a magnetic 
feel by which he traces backward 
his transportation outward, 
even in a fog at sea, though glad 
to be tossed near enough the loft 
or coop to get back the same day. 
"home on time without 
his message." what matter since he has 
got back. migrating always in the same 
direction, bringing all letters 
to the same address, see- 
ing better homes than his, 
he is not theudas 
boasting himself to be some- 
body, this anonymous post- 
man who, as soon as he could fly, 
was carrying valentines and messages of 
state; or soberer news— 
"so please write me and believe that i 
am yours very truly"; fine words 
those. an instrument not just an instinctive 
individual, this 
dove, that lifts his right foot over 
the alighting- 
board to rejoin his ungainly pin-clad dark-skinned 
brood as domestic turtle- 
doves might; two. invariably 
two. the turtle, a not exciting 
bird—in britain shy, detected 
by its constantly heard coo, with- 
out a song but not 
without a voice—does well to stay far 
out of sight; but the pelew pigeon with 
black head, metallic wasp-lustred 
grass-green breast and purple 
legs and feet, need not; nor 
need the nicobar, 
novel, narrow-feathered dove. 
and one should see the papuan 
fancrests with six-sided scale which 
coats the foot; "not much is known about these splendid 
birds" hid in unimag- 
inably weak lead-colored ostrich- 
plumes a third of an inch long, and 
needle-fine cat-whisker-fibered battleship- 
gray lace. the samoan 
tooth-billed pigeon fortunately 
survives also— 
saved from destruction by no longer feeding on 
the ground, a bird with short legs 
and heavy bill, remarkable 
because related to the dodo. 
didus ineptus; man’s remorse 
enshrines it now, abundant still 
in sixteen-one. "a 
little bigger than our swans, these birds 
want wings and lay but one egg" the traveler 
said—"defenceless unsuspicious 
things, with a cry like the 
cry of a gosling." il 
dóudo (the words 
mean simple one)—extinct as 
the solitaires which having "raised 
their young one do not disunite." 
a new pigeon cannot compensate, but we have 
it. with neat-cered eye, long 
face, trim form and posture, this delight- 
ful bird outdoes the dashingly 
black and white dalmatian dog and map-freckled 
pony that indians dress 
with feathers seriatim down 
the mane and tail;— 
a slender cinderella deliberately 
pied, so she on each side is 
the same, an all-feather piebald, 
cuckoo-marked on a titanic scale 
taking perhaps sixteen birds to 
show the whole design, as in chess 
played with men and hors- 
es. yes, the thus medievally 
two-colored sea-pie-patterned semi-swan- 
necked magpie-pigeon, gamecock-legged 
with long-clawed toes, and all 
extremes—head neck back tail 
and feet—coal black, the 
rest snow white, has a surpris- 
ing modernness and fanciness 
and stateliness and…. yes indeed; 
developed by and humbly dedicated to 
the gentlemen of the 
feather club, this is a dainty breed. 
see in the midst of fair leaves 
and much fruit, the swan— 
one line of the mathematician’s 
sign greater-than, drawn 
to an apex where the lake is 
met by the weight on it; or an angel 
standing in the sun, how well 
armed, how manly; 
and promenading 
in sloughs of despond, a monster— 
man when human nothing 
more, grown to immaturity, 
punishing debtors, seeking his due—as 
an arrow turned inward has 
no chance of peace. 
walking-sticks and paperweights and watermarks 
walking among scepter-headed 
weeds and daisies swayed by wind, they said, 
"don’t scatter your 
stick, on account of the souls." led 
from sun-spotted 
paths, we went "where leafy trees meet 
overhead and noise of traffic is unknown"— 
the mind exhilarated 
by life all round, so stirringly 
alive. the root-handled cudgel 
with the bark left on, the woodbine smell- 
ing of the rain, 
the very stones, have life. little 
scars on church-bell 
tongues put there by the devil’s claws— 
authentic phantoms, ghosts, and witches, transformed 
into an invisible 
fabric of inconsistency 
motheaten by self-subtractives— 
now as outright murderers and thieves, 
thrive openly. 
an epigraph before it leaves 
the wax, receives 
to give, and giving must itself 
receive, "difficulty is ordained to check 
poltroons," and courage achieves 
despaired of ends. oppositely 
jointed against indecision, 
the three legs of the triskelion 
meeting in the 
middle between triangles, run 
in unison 
without assistance. yet, trudging 
on two legs that move contradictorily, 
irked by ghosts and witches, one 
does not fear to ask for beauty 
that is power devoid of fear. 
a bold outspoken gentleman, cheer- 
ful, plodding, to- 
the-point, used to the atmosphere 
of work—who here 
appropriate to the thought of 
permanence, says, "this is my taste, it might not 
be another man’s"—makes clear 
that stark sincere unflattery, 
sine cera, is both farthest 
from self-defensiveness and nearest; 
as when a seal 
without haste, slowly is impressed 
and forms a nest 
on which the raised device reversed, 
shows round. it must have been an able workman, 
studious and self-possessed, 
a liker of solidity, 
who gave a greenish waterford 
glass fool’s cap with summit curled down toward 
itself as the 
glass grew, the look of tempered swordsteel, 
and three-ore-d 
fishscale-burnished antimony- 
tin-and-lead’s smoky water-drop type-metal 
smoothness emery-armored 
against rust. its subdued glossy 
splendor leaps out at the eye as 
form dramatizes thought, in the glass 
witchball and air- 
twist cane. this paperweight, in mass 
a stone, surpass- 
ing it in tint, enlarges the 
fine chain-lines in the waterleaf weighted by 
its hardened raindrop surface. 
the paper-mould’s similarly 
once unsolid waspnest-blue, snow- 
white, or seashell-gray rags, seen through, show 
sheepcotes, turkey- 
mills, acorns, and anvils. "stones grow," 
then stop, and so 
do gardens. "plants grow and live; men 
grow and live and think." utilizey la poste 
aerienne, trade will follow 
the telephone. the post’s jerky 
cancellings ink the stamp, relet- 
tering stiltedly, as a puppet- 
acrobat walks 
about with high steps on his net, 
an alphabet 
of words and animals where the 
wire-embedded watermark’s more integral 
expressiveness had first set 
its alabaster effigy. 
in bark silverer than the swan, 
esparto grass, or so-called titan 
parchment tougher 
than hercules’ lion-skin—spanish, 
umbrian, 
eastern, open, and jeweled crowns, 
corroborate the dolphin, crane, and ox; sealed 
with wax by a pelican 
studying affectionately 
a nest’s three-in-one cartwheel tri- 
legged face. "for those we love, live and die" 
the motto says. 
and we do. part pelican, i, 
doubting the high- 
way’s wide giant trivia where 
three roads meet in artificial openness, 
am obliged to justify 
outspoken cordiality. 
firm-feathered juniper springing 
from difficult ground, the sky trembling 
with power, the rain 
falling upon the bird singing, 
modest printing, 
on honest paper properly 
trimmed, are gifts addressed to memory, and a 
gift is permanent, shining 
like the juniper’s trinity 
of spines. an unburdensomely 
worthy officer of charity, 
the evergreen 
with awlshaped leaves in whorls of three— 
successively 
firm. "on the first day of christmas 
my true love he sent unto me, part of a 
bough of a juniper-tree," 
javelin-ed consecutively. 
virginia britannia 
pale sand edges england’s old 
dominion. the air is soft, warm, hot, 
above the cedar-dotted emerald shore 
known to the redbird, 
the redcoated musketeer, 
the trumpet-flower, the cavalier, 
the parson, and the 
wild parishioner. a deer- 
track in a church-floor 
brick and sir george yeardley’s 
coffin-tacks and tomb remain. 
the now tremendous vine-en- 
compassed hackberry 
starred with the ivy-flower, 
shades the church tower. 
and "a great sinner lyeth here" under 
the sycamore. 
a fritillary zigzags 
toward the seemly resting-place of this 
unusual man and pleasing sinner who 
"waits for a joyful 
resurrection." we-re-wo- 
comoco’s fur crown could be no 
odder than we were 
with ostrich, latin motto, 
and small gold horse-shoe, 
as arms for an able 
sting-ray-hampered pioneer, 
painted as a turk it seems, 
the incessantly 
exciting captain smith 
who patient with 
his inferiors, was a pugnacious 
equal; and to 
powhatan obliged, but not 
a flatterer. rare indian, crowned by 
christopher newport! the old dominion has 
all-green grass-hoppers 
in all-green, box-sculptured grounds; 
an almost english green surrounds 
them. care has formed a- 
mong unenglish insect sounds, 
the white wall-rose. as 
thick as daniel boone’s grape- 
vine, the stem has wide-spaced great 
blunt alternating ostrich- 
skin warts that were thorns. 
care has formed walls of yew 
since indians knew 
the fort old field and narrow neck of land 
that jamestown was. 
observe the terse virginian, 
the mettlesome gray one that drives the 
owl from tree to tree and imitates the call 
of whippoorwill or 
lark or katydid—the leadgray 
lead-legged mocking-bird with head 
held half away, and 
meditative eye as dead 
as sculptured marble 
eye, alighting noiseless, 
muses in the semi-sun, 
standing on tall thin legs as 
if he did not see, 
conspicuous, alone, 
on the round stonetopped 
table with lead cupids grouped to form 
the pedestal. 
narrow herring-bonelaid bricks, 
a dusty pink beside the dwarf box- 
bordered pansies, share the ivy-arbor shade 
with cemetery 
lace settees, one at each side, 
and with the bird: box-bordered tide- 
water gigantic 
jet black pansies (splendor; pride;) 
not for a decade 
dressed, but for a day, in 
overpowering velvet; and 
gray blue-andalusian 
cock-feather pale ones 
ink-lined on the edge, fur- 
eyed, with ochre 
on the cheek. the slowmoving glossy, tall 
quick cavalcade 
of buckeye-brown surprising 
jumpers, the contrasting work-mule and 
show-mule \& witch-cross door \& "strong sweet prison" 
are part of what 
has come about, in the black 
idiom, from advancing backward 
in a circle; 
from taking the potomac 
cowbirdlike; and on 
the chickahominy 
establishing the negro, opportunely brought, to strength- 
en protest against 
tyranny. rare unscent- 
ed, providently 
hot, too sweet, inconsistent flowerbed! 
old dominion 
earth makes sunflower-heads grow large; 
hibiscus and so-called mimosa 
close at night; the scarlet peculiarly-quilled 
pomegranate-petals, 
the african violet, 
and camellia, perfumeless. yet 
house-high glistening green 
magnolia-trees with velvet- 
textured flower, are filled 
with anaesthetic scent 
enough to make one die; as 
the gardenia is, though its 
two-toned green-furled buds 
and dark leaf-vein on green- 
er leaf when seen 
against the light attract no pigmy bees 
such as the frilled 
silk substanceless faint flower of 
the crape-myrtle does. odd pamunkey 
princess, birdclaw-earringed; with a pet raccoon 
from the mattapo- 
ni (what a bear!) feminine 
odd indian young lady! odd thin- 
gauze-and-taffeta- 
dressed english one! terrapin 
meat and crested spoon 
feed the mistress of french 
plum-and-turquoise-piped chaise-longue; 
of brass-knobbed slat front-door and 
everywhere open 
shaded house on indian- 
named virginian 
streams, in counties named for english lords. the 
rattlesnake soon 
said from our once dashingly 
undiffident first flag, "don’t tread on 
me," tactless symbol of a new republic. 
priorities were 
cradled in this region not 
noted for humility; spot 
that has high-singing 
frogs, cotton-mouth snakes and cot- 
ton-fields; clay for brick, 
lawrence jugs with persian 
loping wolf design; and hounds. 
here the poor unpoisonous 
terrapin likes to 
idle near the sea-top; 
tobacco-crop 
gains have church tablets; devil’s woodyard swamps 
and one-brick-thick- 
wall serpentine shadows star- 
tle strangers. the strangler fig, the dwarf- 
fancying egyptian, the american, 
the dutch, the noble 
roman, in taking what they 
pleased—colonizing as we say— 
were not all intel- 
lect and delicacy. a 
black savage or such 
as was subject to the 
deer-fur crown is not all brawn 
and animality. the 
limestone tea-table, 
the mandolin-shaped big 
and little fig, 
and the now disused silkworm-trees, imply 
amity; much 
kind tyranny made ha-has 
that kept back cows; clock-strengthened stocking 
and drooping cotton dress with handmade edge, mark 
tyrant taste; the song- 
bird wakes too soon, to enjoy 
excellent idleness, destroy- 
ing legitimate 
laziness, this unbought toy 
even in the dark 
risking loud whee whee whee 
of joy, the caraway-seed- 
spotted sparrow perched in the 
dew-drenched juniper 
beside the window-ledge; 
the little hedgesparrow 
that wakes up seven minutes soon- 
er than the lark 
they say. the live oak’s rounded 
mass of undulating boughs, the white 
pine, the agèd hackberry—handsomest vis- 
itor of all—the 
cedar’s etched solidity, 
the cypress, lose identity 
and are one tree, as 
sunset flames increasingly 
against their leaf-chis- 
elled blackening ridge of green; 
and the redundantly wind- 
widened clouds expanding to 
earth size above the 
town’s bothered with wages 
childish sages, 
are to the child an intimation of 
what glory is. 
bird-witted 
with innocent wide penguin eyes, three 
grown fledgling mocking-birds below 
the pussy-willow tree, 
stand in a row, 
wings touching, feebly solemn, 
till they see 
their no longer larger 
mother bringing 
something which will partially 
feed one of them. 
towards the high-keyed intermittent squeak 
of broken carriage-springs, made by 
the three similar, meek- 
coated bird’s-eye 
freckled forms she comes; and when 
from the beak 
of one, the still living 
beetle has dropped 
out, she picks it up and puts 
it in again. 
standing in the shade till they have dressed 
their thickly-filamented, pale 
pussy-willow-surfaced 
coats, they spread tail 
and wings, showing one by one, 
the modest 
white stripe lengthwise on the 
tail and crosswise 
on the under wing, and the 
accordion 
is closed again. what delightful note 
with rapid unexpected flute- 
sounds leaping from the throat 
of the astute 
grown bird comes back to one from 
the remote 
unenergetic sun- 
lit air before 
the brood was here? why has the 
bird’s voice become 
harsh? a piebald cat observing them, 
is slowly creeping toward the trim 
trio on the tree-stem. 
unused to him 
the three make room—uneasy 
new problem. 
a dangling foot that missed 
its grasp, is raised 
and finds the twig on which it 
planned to perch. the 
parent darting down, nerved by what chills 
the blood, and by hope rewarded— 
of toil—since nothing fills 
squeaking unfed 
mouths, wages deadly combat, 
and half kills 
with bayonet beak and 
cruel wings, the 
intellectual, cautious- 
l y c r e e p i n g c a t. 
half deity 
half worm. we all, infant and adult, have 
stopped to watch the butterfly—last of the 
elves—and learned to spare the wingless worm 
that hopefully ascends the tree. the well-known 
silk tiger swallowtail 
of south america, with body lightly 
furred was that bearing pigments which engrave 
the lower wings with dragon’s blood, weightless. 
they that have wings must not have weights. this more 
peninsula-tailed one with a black 
pitchfork-scallop edge on sunburnt zebra-skin, 
tired by the trip it made 
with drover-like tenacity, has been 
sleeping upright on the elm. its yellowness, 
that of the autumn poplar-leaf, by day 
has been observed. disguised in butterfly- 
bush wedgwood-blue, psyche follows it 
to that small tree, micromalus, the midget 
crab; to the mimosa; 
and from that, to the flowering pomegranate. 
baffled not by the quick-clouding serene gray 
moon but forced by the hot hot sun to pant, 
she stands on rug-soft grass; though "it is not 
permitted to gaze informally 
on majesty in such a manner as might 
well happen here." the blind 
all-seeing butterfly, fearing the slight 
finger, wanders, as though it were ignorant, 
across the path and lights on zephyr’s palm, 
planting forefeet soberly; then pawing 
like a horse, turns round—apostrophe- 
tipped brown antennae: porcupining out as 
it arranges nervous 
wings. vexed because curiosity has 
been pursuing it, it cannot now be calm. 
the butterfly’s round unglazed china eyes, 
pale tobacco brown, with the large eyes of 
the nymph on them—gray eyes that now are 
black, for she with controlled agitated glance 
observes the insect’s face 
and all’s a-quiver with significance— 
enact the scene of cats’ eyes on the magpie’s 
eyes, by goya. butterflies do not need 
home advice. as though zephyr and psyche 
were patent-leather cricket singing 
loud, and gnat-catching garden-toad, the swallow- 
tail bewitched and danger- 
ous, springs away, zebra half-deified, 
trampling the air as it tramples the flowers, feed- 
ing where it pivots. twig-veined irascible 
fastidious stubborn undisciplined 
zebra! sometimes one is grateful to 
a stranger for looking very nice. but free 
to leave the outspread hand 
it flies, drunken with triviality 
or guided by visions of strength, off until, 
diminishing like wreckage on the sea, 
rising and falling easily, it mounts 
the swell and keeping its true course with 
what swift majesty, indifferent to 
us, is gone. deaf to ap- 
proval—magnet-nice, as it flutters through 
airs now slack, now fresh. it has strict ears when the 
west wind speaks. it was he, with mirror eyes 
of strong anxiety, who had no net 
or flowering shrewd-scented tropical 
device, or lignum vitae perch in half-shut 
hand; for ours is not a 
canely land; nor was it oberon, but 
this quiet young man with piano replies, 
named zephyr, whose hand spread out was enough 
to tempt the fiery tiger-horse to stand, 
eyes staring skyward and chest arching 
bravely out—historic metamorphoser 
and saintly animal 
in india, in egypt, anywhere. 
his talk was as strange as my grandmother’s muff. 
smooth gnarled crape myrtle 
a brass-green bird with grass- 
green throat smooth as a nut, springs from 
twig to twig askew, copying the 
chinese flower piece—businesslike atom 
in the stiff-leafed tree’s blue- 
pink, dregs-of-wine, pyramids 
of mathematic 
circularity—one of a 
pair. a redbird with a hatchet 
crest lights straight, on a twig 
between the two, bending the 
peculiar 
bouquet down; and there are 
several black antique 
bootjack fireflies touched with weak bright 
hunting-pink. "the legendary white- 
eared black bulbul that sings 
only in pure sanskrit" should 
be here—"tame clever 
true nightingale." the cardinal- 
bird that is usually a 
pair looks somewhat odd, like 
"the ambassadorial 
inverness 
worn by one who dresses 
in new york but dreams of 
london." it was artifice saw 
on a patch-box pigeon-egg, room for 
fervent script, and wrote as with a bird’s claw 
under the pair on the 
hyacinth-blue lid—"joined in 
friendship, crowned by love." 
an aspect may deceive; as the 
elephant’s columbine-tubed trunk 
held waveringly out— 
an at will heavy thing—is 
delicate. 
art is unfortunate. 
one may be a blameless 
bachelor and it is but a 
step to congreve. a rosalindless 
redbird comes where people are, knowing they 
have not made a point of 
being where he is—this bird 
which says not sings, "without 
loneliness i should be more 
lonely, so i keep it"—half in 
japanese. and what of 
our clasped hands that swear "by peace 
plenty; as 
by wisdom peace." alas! 
the pangolin 
another armored animal—scale 
lapping scale with spruce-cone regu- 
larity until they 
form the uninterrupted central 
tail-row. this near artichoke 
with head and legs and grit-equipped giz- 
zard, the night miniature artist- 
engineer, is    leonardo’s 
indubitable son? im- 
pressive animal 
and toiler, of whom we seldom hear. 
armor seems extra. but for him, 
the closing ear- 
ridge—or bare 
ear, lacking even this small 
eminence—and similarly safe 
contracting nose and eye apertures 
impenetrably closable, 
are not;—a true ant-eat- 
er, not cockroach-eater, who endures 
exhausting solitary 
trips through unfamiliar ground at night, 
returning before sunrise; stepping 
in the moonlight,    on the moonlight 
peculiarly, that the out- 
side edges of his 
hands may bear the weight and save the claws 
for digging. serpentined about 
the tree, he draws 
away from 
danger unpugnaciously, 
with no sound but a harmless hiss; keep- 
ing the fragile grace of the thomas- 
of-leighton-buzzard westminster 
abbey wrought-iron vine, or 
rolls himself into a ball that has 
power to defy all effort 
to unroll it;—strongly intailed, neat 
head for core, on neck not breaking off, 
with curled-in feet. nevertheless 
he has sting-proof scales; and nest 
of rocks closed with earth 
from inside, which he can thus darken. 
sun and moon \& day and night \& man and beast 
each with a splen- 
dor which man 
in all his vileness cannot 
set aside; each with an excellence! 
"fearful yet to be feared," the armored 
ant-eater met by the driver 
ant does not turn back, but 
engulfs what he can, the flattened sword- 
edged leafpoints on the tail and 
artichoke-set leg and body plates 
quivering violently when it 
retaliates    and swarms on him. 
compact like the furled fringed frill 
on the hat-brim of 
gargallo’s hollow iron head of a 
matador, he will drop and will 
then walk away 
unhurt, al- 
though if unintruded on 
he will come slowly down the tree, helped 
by his tail. the giant-pangolin 
tail, graceful tool, as prop or hand 
or broom or axe, tipped like 
the elephant’s trunk with special skin, 
is not lost on this ant and 
stone swallowing uninjurable 
artichoke, which simpletons thought a 
living fable    whom the stones had 
nourished whereas ants had done 
so. pangolins are 
not aggressive animals; between 
dusk and day, they have the not un- 
chainlike, machine- 
like form and 
frictionless creep of a thing 
made graceful by adversities, con- 
versities. to explain grace requires 
a curious hand. if that which 
is at all were not for 
ever, why would those who graced the spires 
with animals and gathered 
there to rest, on cold luxurious 
low stone seats—a monk and monk and monk— 
between the thus ingenious roof- 
supports, have slaved to confuse 
grace with a kindly 
manner, time in which to pay a debt, 
the cure for sins, a graceful use 
of what are yet 
approved stone 
mullions branching out across 
the perpendiculars? a sailboat 
was the first machine. the manis, made 
for moving quietly also, 
is neither a prisoner 
nor a god; on hind feet plantigrade, 
with certain postures of a 
man. beneath sun and moon, man slaving 
to make his life more sweet, leaves half the 
flowers worth having,    needing to choose 
wisely how to use the strength;— 
a paper-maker 
like the wasp; a tractor of food-stuffs, 
like the ant; spidering a length 
of web from bluffs 
above a 
stream; in fighting, mechanicked 
like the pangolin; capsizing in 
disheartenment. bedizened or stark 
naked, man, the self, the being 
so-called human, writingmaster 
to this world, griffons a dark 
"like does not like like that is 
obnoxious"; and writes errror with four 
r’s. among animals, one has a 
sense of humor    then, which saves a 
few steps, which saves years—unig- 
norant, modest and 
unemotional, and all emo- 
tion; one with everlasting vig- 
or, power to grow 
though there are 
few of him—who can make one 
breathe faster, and make one erecter. 
not afraid of anything is he 
and then goes cowering forth, tread paced 
to meet an obstacle 
at every step. consistent with the 
formula—warm blood, no gills, 
two pairs of hands and a few hairs—that 
is a mammal; there he sits in his 
own habitat,    serge-clad, strong-shod. 
the prey of fear; he, always 
curtailed, extinguished, 
thwarted by the dusk, work partly done, 
says to the alternating blaze, 
"again the sun! 
anew each 
day; and new and new and new, 
that comes into and steadies my soul. 
rigorists 
"we saw reindeer 
browsing," a friend who’d been in lapland, said: 
"finding their own food; they are adapted 
to scant reino 
or pasture, yet they can run eleven 
miles in fifty minutes; the feet spread when 
the snow is soft, 
and act as snow-shoes. they are rigorists 
however handsomely cutwork artists 
of lapland and 
siberia elaborate the trace 
or saddle-girth with saw-tooth leather lace. 
one looked at us 
with its firm face part brown, part white,—a queen 
of alpine flowers. santa claus’ reindeer, seen 
at last, had gray- 
brown fur, with a neck like edelweiss or 
lion’s foot,—leontopodium more 
exactly." and 
this candelabrum-headed ornament 
for a place where ornaments are scarce, sent 
to alaska, 
was a gift preventing the extinction 
of the esquimo. the battle was won 
by a quiet man, 
sheldon jackson, evangel to that race 
whose reprieve he read in the reindeer’s face. 
four quartz crystal clocks 
there are four vibrators, the world’s exactest clocks; 
and these quartz time-pieces that tell 
time intervals to other clocks, 
these worksless clocks work well; 
and all four, independently the 
same, are there in the cool bell 
laboratory time 
vault. checked by a comparator with arlington, 
they punctualize the "radio, 
cinéma," and "presse,"—a group the 
giraudoux truth-bureau 
of hoped-for accuracy has termed 
"instruments of truth." we know— 
as jean giraudoux says 
certain arabs have not heard—that napoleon 
is dead; that a quartz prism when 
the temperature changes, feels 
the change and that the then 
electrified alternate edges 
oppositely charged, threaten 
careful timing; so that 
this water-clear crystal as the greeks used to say, 
this "clear ice" must be kept at the 
same coolness. repetition, with 
the scientist, should be 
synonymous with accuracy. 
the lemur-student can see 
that an aye-aye is not 
an angwan-tíbo, potto, or loris. the sea- 
side burden should not embarrass 
the bell-boy with the buoy-ball 
endeavoring to pass 
hotel patronesses; nor could a 
practiced ear confuse the glass 
eyes for taxidermists 
with eye-glasses from the optometrist. and as 
meridian-7 1, 2 
1, 2 gives, each fifteenth second 
in the same voice, the new 
data—"the time will be" so and so— 
you realize that "when you 
hear the signal," you’ll be 
hearing jupiter or jour pater, the day god— 
the salvaged son of father time— 
telling the cannibal chronos 
(eater of his proxime 
newborn progeny) that punctuality 
is not a crime. 
the paper nautilus 
for authorities whose hopes 
are shaped by mercenaries? 
writers entrapped by 
teatime fame and by 
commuters’ comforts? not for these 
the paper nautilus 
constructs her thin glass shell. 
giving her perishable 
souvenir of hope, a dull 
white outside and smooth- 
edged inner surface 
glossy as the sea, the watchful 
maker of it guards it 
day and night; she scarcely 
eats until the eggs are hatched. 
buried eight-fold in her eight 
arms, for she is in 
a sense a devil- 
fish, her glass ramshorn-cradled freight 
is hid but is not crushed. 
as hercules, bitten 
by a crab loyal to the hydra, 
was hindered to succeed, 
the intensively 
watched eggs coming from 
the shell free it when they are freed,— 
leaving its wasp-nest flaws 
of white on white, and close- 
laid ionic chiton-folds 
like the lines in the mane of 
a parthenon horse, 
round which the arms had 
wound themselves as if they knew love 
is the only fortress 
strong enough to trust to. 
nevertheless 
you’ve seen a strawberry 
that’s had a struggle; yet 
was, where the fragments met, 
a hedgehog or a starfish 
for the multitude 
of seeds. what better food 
than apple-seeds—the fruit 
within the fruit—locked in 
like counter-curved twin 
hazel-nuts? frost that kills 
the little rubber-plant- 
leaves of kok-saghyz-stalks, can’t 
harm the roots; they still grow 
in frozen ground. once where 
there was a prickly-pear- 
leaf clinging to barbed wire, 
a root shot down to grow 
in earth two feet below; 
as carrots form mandrakes 
or a ram’s-horn root some- 
times. victory won’t come 
to me unless i go 
to it; a grape-tendril 
ties a knot in knots till 
knotted thirty times,—so 
the bound twig that’s under- 
gone and over-gone, can’t stir. 
the weak overcomes its 
menace, the strong over- 
comes itself. what is there 
like fortitude! what sap 
went through that little thread 
to make the cherry red! 
the wood-weasel 
emerges daintily, the skunk— 
don’t laugh—in sylvan black and white chipmunk 
regalia. the inky thing 
adaptively whited with glistening 
goat-fur, is wood-warden. in his 
ermined well-cuttlefish-inked wool, he is 
determination’s totem. outlawed? 
his sweet face and powerful feet go about 
in chieftain’s coat of chilcat cloth. 
he is his own protection from the moth, 
noble little warrior. that 
otter-skin on it, the living pole-cat, 
smothers anything that stings. well,— 
this same weasel’s playful and his weasel 
associates are too. only 
wood-weasels shall associate with me. 
elephants 
uplifted and waved until immobilized 
wistarialike, the opposing opposed 
mouse-gray twined proboscises’ trunk formed by two 
trunks, fights itself to a spiraled inter-nosed 
deadlock of dyke-enforced massiveness. it’s a 
knock-down drag-out fight that asks no quarter? just 
a pastime, as when the trunk rains on itself 
the pool it siphoned up; or when—since each must 
provide his forty-pound bough dinner—he broke 
the leafy branches. these templars of the tooth, 
these matched intensities, take master care of 
master tools. one, sleeping with the calm of youth, 
at full length in the half dry sun-flecked stream-bed, 
rests his hunting-horn-curled trunk on shallowed stone. 
the sloping hollow of the sleeper’s body 
cradles the gently breathing eminence’s prone 
mahout, asleep like a lifeless six-foot 
frog, so feather light the elephant’s stiff 
ear’s unconscious of the crossed feet’s weight. and the 
defenseless human thing sleeps as sound as if 
incised with hard wrinkles, embossed with wide ears, 
invincibly tusked, made safe by magic hairs! 
as if, as if, it is all ifs; we are at 
much unease. but magic’s masterpiece is theirs,— 
houdini’s serenity quelling his fears. 
elephant ear-witnesses-to-be of hymns 
and glorias, these ministrants all gray or 
gray with white on legs or trunk, are a pilgrims’ 
pattern of revery not reverence,—a 
religious procession without any priests, 
the centuries-old carefullest unrehearsed 
play. blessed by buddha’s tooth, the obedient beasts 
themselves as toothed temples blessing the street, see 
the white elephant carry the cushion that 
carries the casket that carries the tooth. 
amenable to what, matched with him, are gnat 
trustees, he does not step on them as the white- 
canopied blue-cushioned tooth is augustly 
and slowly returned to the shrine. though white is 
the color of worship and of mourning, he 
is not here to worship and he is too wise 
to mourn,—a life-prisoner but reconciled. 
with trunk tucked up compactly—the elephant’s 
sign of defeat—he resisted, but is the child 
of reason now. his straight trunk seems to say: when 
what we hoped for came to nothing, we revived. 
as loss could not ever alter socrates’ 
tranquillity, the elephant has contrived 
equanimity. with the socrates of 
animals as with sophocles the bee, on whose 
tombstone a hive was incised, sweetness tinctures 
his gravity. his held up fore-leg for use 
as a stair, to be climbed or descended with 
the aid of his ear, expounds the brotherhood 
of creatures to man the encroacher by the 
small word with the dot, meaning know,—the verb bd. 
these knowers, these distinct rememberers 
like bu˙ d, of what they have experienced, are 
"unable to pierce by one dart from the bow 
four plaintain-leaves laid at the points of a square"; 
and cannot, like buddha, change missiles to wreaths, 
alter their shape, bisect hairs in the dark, make 
their wisdom apparent in rays of all hues, 
or turn heat, exasperated, to earthquake- 
fire. yet they "arouse the feeling that they are 
allied to man" and can change roles with their trustees. 
hardship makes the soldier; then teachableness 
makes him the philosopher—as socrates, 
prudently testing the suspicious thing, knew 
the wisest is he who’s not sure that he knows. 
who rides on a tiger can never dismount; 
asleep on an elephant, that is repose. 
the mind is an enchanting thing 
is an enchanted thing 
like the glaze on a 
katydid-wing 
subdivided by sun 
till the nettings are legion. 
like gieseking playing scarlatti; 
like the apteryx-awl 
as a beak, or the 
kiwi’s rain-shawl 
of haired feathers, the mind 
feeling its way as though blind, 
walks along with its eyes on the ground. 
it has memory’s ear 
that can hear without 
having to hear. 
like the gyroscope’s fall, 
truly unequivocal 
because trued by regnant certainty, 
it is a power of 
strong enchantment. it 
is like the dove- 
neck animated by 
sun; it is memory’s eye; 
it’s conscientious inconsistency. 
it tears off the veil; tears 
the temptation, the 
mist the heart wears, 
from its eyes,—if the heart 
has a face; it takes apart 
dejection. it’s fire in the dove-neck’s 
iridescence; in the 
inconsistencies 
of scarlatti. 
unconfusion submits 
its confusion to proof; it’s 
not a herod’s oath that cannot change. 
keeping their world large 
all too literally, their flesh 
and their spirit are our shield 
new york times, 7th june, 1944 
i should like to see that country’s tiles, bedrooms, 
stone patios 
and ancient wells: rinaldo 
caramonica’s the cobbler’s, frank sblendorio’s 
and dominick angelastro’s country— 
the grocer’s, the iceman’s, the dancer’s—the 
beautiful miss damiano’s; wisdom’s 
and all angels’ italy, this christmas day 
this christmas year. 
a noiseless piano, an 
innocent war, the heart that can act against itself. here, 
each unlike and all alike, could 
so many—stumbling, falling, multiplied 
till bodies lay as ground to walk on—say 
"if christ and the apostles died in vain, i’ll 
die in vain with them"? 
when the very heart was a prayer 
against this way of victory. stem after stem 
of what we call the tree—set, row 
on row; that forest of white crosses; the 
vision makes us faint. my eyes won’t close to it. while 
the knife was lifted, isaac the offering 
lay mute. 
these, laid like animals for sacrifice, 
like isaac on the mount, were their own substitute. 
and must they all be harmed by those 
whom they have saved. tears that don’t fall are what 
they wanted. belief in belief marching 
marching marching—all alone, all similar, 
spurning pathos, 
clothed in fear—marching to death 
marching to life; it was like the cross, is like the cross. 
keeping their world large, that silent 
marching marching marching and this silence 
for which there is no description, are 
the voices of fighters with no rests between, 
who would not yield; 
whose spirits and whose bodies 
all too literally were our shield, are still our shield. 
they fought the enemy, we fight 
fat living and self-pity. shine, o shine 
unfalsifying sun, on this sick scene. 
his shield 
the pin-swin or spine-swine 
(the edgehog miscalled hedgehog) with all his edges out, 
echidna and echinoderm in distressed- 
pin-cushion thorn-fur coats, the spiny pig or porcupine, 
the rhino with horned snout— 
everything is battle-dressed. 
pig-fur won’t do, i’ll wrap 
myself in salamander-skin like presbyter john. 
a lizard in the midst of flames, a firebrand 
that is life, asbestos-eyed asbestos-eared, with tattooed nap 
and permanent pig on 
the instep; he can withstand 
fire and won’t drown. in his 
unconquerable country of unpompous gusto, 
gold was so common none considered it; greed 
and flattery were unknown. though rubies large as tennis- 
balls conjoined in streams so 
that the mountain seemed to bleed, 
the inextinguishable 
salamander styled himself but presbyter. his shield 
was his humility. in carpasian 
linen coat, flanked by his household lion-cubs and sable 
retinue, he revealed 
a formula safer than 
an armorer’s: the power of relinquishing 
what one would keep; that is freedom. become dinosaur- 
skulled, quilled or salamander-wooled, more ironshod 
and javelin-dressed than a hedgehog battalion of steel, but be 
dull. don’t be envied or 
armed with a measuring-rod. 
propriety 
is some such word 
as the chord 
brahms had heard 
from a bird, 
sung down near the root of the throat; 
it’s the little downy woodpecker 
spiraling up a tree— 
up up up like mercury; 
a not long 
sparrow-song 
of hayseed 
magnitude— 
a tuned reticence with rigor 
from strength at the source. propriety is 
bach’s solfegietto— 
harmonica and basso. 
the fish-spine 
on firs, on 
somber trees 
by the sea’s 
walls of wave-worn rock—have it; and 
a moonbow and bach’s cheerful firmness 
in a minor key. 
it’s an owl-and-a-pussy- 
both-content 
agreement. 
come, come. it’s 
mixed with wits; 
it’s not a graceful sadness. it’s 
resistance with bent head, like foxtail 
millet’s. brahms and bach, 
no; bach and brahms. to thank bach 
for his song 
first, is wrong. 
pardon me; 
both are the 
unintentional pansy-face 
uncursed by self-inspection; blackened 
because born that way. 
voracities and verities sometimes are interacting 
i don’t like diamonds; 
the emerald’s "grass-lamp glow" is better; 
and unobtrusiveness is dazzling, 
upon occasion. 
some kinds of gratitude are trying. 
poets, don’t make a fuss; 
the elephant’s "crooked trumpet" "doth write"; 
and to a tiger-book i am reading— 
i think you know the one— 
i am under obligation. 
one may be pardoned, yes i know 
one may, for love undying. 
a face 
"i am not treacherous, callous, jealous, superstitious, 
supercilious, venomous, or absolutely hideous": 
studying and studying its expression, 
exasperated desperation 
though at no real impasse, 
would gladly break the glass; 
when love of order, ardor, uncircuitous simplicity, 
with an expression of inquiry, are all one needs to be! 
certain faces, a few, one or two—or one 
face photographed by recollection— 
to my mind, to my sight, 
must remain a delight. 
by disposition of angels 
messengers much like ourselves? explain it. 
steadfastness the darkness makes explicit? 
something heard most clearly when not near it? 
above particularities, 
these unparticularities praise cannot violate. 
one has seen, in such steadiness never deflected, 
how by darkness a star is perfected. 
star that does not ask me if i see it? 
fir that would not wish me to uproot it? 
speech that does not ask me if i hear it? 
mysteries expound mysteries. 
steadier than steady, star dazzling me, live and elate, 
no need to say, how like some we have known; too like her, 
too like him, and a-quiver forever. 
the icosasphere 
"in buckinghamshire hedgerows 
the birds nesting in the merged green density, 
weave little bits of string and moths and feathers and thistledown, 
in parabolic concentric curves" 
and, working for concavity, leave spherical feats of rare efficiency; 
whereas through lack of integration, 
avid for someone’s fortune, 
three were slain and ten committed perjury, 
six died, two killed themselves, and two paid fines for risks they’d run. 
but then there is the icosasphere 
in which at last we have steel-cutting at its summit of economy, 
since twenty triangles conjoined, can wrap one 
ball or double-rounded shell 
with almost no waste, so geometrically 
neat, it’s an icosahedron. would the engineers making one, 
or mr. j. o. jackson tell us 
how the egyptians could have set up seventy-eight-foot solid granite vertically? 
we should like to know how that was done. 
armor’s undermining modesty 
at first i thought a pest 
must have alighted on my wrist. 
it was a moth almost an owl, 
its wings were furred so well, 
with backgammon-board wedges interlacing 
on the wing— 
like cloth of gold in a pattern 
of scales with a hair-seal persian 
sheen. once, self-determination 
made an axe of a stone 
and hacked things out with hairy paws. the consequence—our mis-set 
alphabet. 
arise, for it is day. 
even gifted scholars lose their way 
through faulty etymology. 
no wonder we hate poetry, 
and stars and harps and the new moon. if tributes cannot 
be implicit, 
give me diatribes and the fragrance of iodine, 
the cork oak acorn grown in spain; 
the pale-ale-eyed impersonal look 
which the sales-placard gives the bock beer buck. 
what is more precise than precision? illusion. 
knights we’ve known, 
like those familiar 
now unfamiliar knights who sought the grail, were 
ducs in old roman fashion 
without the addition 
of wreaths and silver rods, and armor gilded 
or inlaid. 
they did not let self bar 
their usefulness to others who were 
different. though mars is excessive 
is being preventive, 
heroes need not write an ordinall of attributes to enumerate 
what they hate. 
i should, i confess, 
like to have a talk with one of them about excess, 
and armor’s undermining modesty 
instead of innocent depravity. 
a mirror-of-steel uninsistence should countenance 
continence, 
objectified and not by chance, 
there in its frame of circumstance 
of innocence and altitude 
in an unhackneyed solitude. 
there is the tarnish; and there, the imperishable wish. 
quoting an also private thought 
some speak of things we know, as new; 
and you, of things unknown as things forgot. 
a similar coral invades the apple, dyed 
inside as by infusion of the rind, 
or the poem that chanced to be prose, 
disclosing the signature in an interior 
mathematician’s parenthesis— 
astute device quite different from the autograph. 
somehow the accident of pleasure—a dedication qualitied 
indeed. it is at the opposite pole from the miser’s 
escutcheon, three vises hard-screwed; 
three padlocks clodhopping upon sensibility 
that devastating asset antipodal to pride, 
that would not for the world intrude 
we call them the brave 
who likely were reluctant to be brave. 
sitting by a slow fire on a waste 
of snow, i would last about an hour. 
better not euphemize the grave. 
in this fashionable town, endearments are the mode 
though generals are appraised—not praised— 
and one is not forced to walk about 
where a muddy slough serves as a road. 
"what are these shadows barely 
visible, which radar fails to scan?" 
ships "keeping distance on the gentle swell." 
and "what is a free world ready 
to do, for what it values most?" 
bestow little discs the bereaved may touch? 
can i ever forget it even when dead— 
that congressionally honored ghost 
mourned by a friend whose shoulder sags— 
weeping on the shoulder of another 
for another; with another sitting near, 
filling out casualty-tags. 
what of it? we call them the brave 
perhaps? yes; what if the time should come 
when no one will fight for anything 
and there’s nothing of worth to save. 
bulwarked against fate 
affirmed. pent by power that holds it fast— 
a paradox. pent. hard pressed, 
you take the blame and are inviolate. 
abased at last; 
not the tempest-tossed. 
compressed; firmed by the thrust of the blast 
till compact, like a bulwark against fate; 
lead-saluted, 
saluted by lead? 
as though flying old glory full mast. 
apparition of splendor 
partaking of the miraculous 
since never known literally, 
dürer’s rhinoceros 
might have startled us equally 
if black-and-white-spined elaborately. 
like another porcupine, or fern, 
the mouth in an arching egret 
was too black to discern 
till exposed as a silhouette; 
but the double-embattled thistle of jet— 
disadvantageous supposedly— 
has never shot a quill. was it 
some joyous fantasy, 
plain eider-eared exhibit 
of spines rooted in the sooty moss, 
or "train supported by porcupines— 
a fairy’s eleven yards long"? … 
as when the lightning shines 
on thistlefine spears, among 
prongs in lanes above lanes of a shorter prong, 
"with the forest for nurse," also dark 
at the base—where needle-debris 
springs and shows no footmark; 
the setting for a symmetry 
you must not touch unless you are a fairy. 
maine should be pleased that its animal 
is not a waverer, and rather 
than fight, lets the primed quill fall. 
shallow oppressor, intruder, 
insister, you have found a resister. 
the sycamore 
against a gun-metal sky 
i saw an albino giraffe. without 
leaves to modify, 
chamois-white as 
said, though partly pied near the base, 
it towered where a chain of 
stepping-stones lay in a stream nearby; 
glamour to stir the envy 
of anything in motley— 
hampshire pig, the living lucky-stone; or 
all-white butterfly. 
a commonplace: 
there’s more than just one kind of grace. 
we don’t like flowers that do 
not wilt; they must die, and nine 
she-camel-hairs aid memory. 
o to be a dragon 
if i, like solomon, … 
could have my wish— 
my wish ... o to be a dragon, 
a symbol of the power of heaven—of silkworm 
size or immense; at times invisible. 
i may, i might, i must 
if you will tell me why the fen 
appears impassable, i then 
will tell you why i think that i 
can get across it if i try. 
a jellyfish 
visible, invisible, 
a fluctuating charm 
an amber-tinctured amethyst 
inhabits it, your arm 
approaches and it opens 
and it closes; you had meant 
to catch it and it quivers; 
you abandon your intent. 
values in use 
i attended school and i liked the place— 
grass and little locust-leaf shadows like lace. 
writing was discussed. they said, "we create 
values in the process of living, daren’t await 
their historic progress." be abstract 
and you’ll wish you’d been specific; it’s a fact. 
what was i studying? values in use, 
"judged on their own ground." am i still abstruse? 
walking along, a student said offhand, 
"‘relevant’ and ‘plausible’ were words i understand." 
a pleasing statement, anonymous friend. 
certainly the means must not defeat the end. 
no better than "a withered daffodil" 
ben johnson said he was? "o i could still 
like melting snow upon some craggy hill, 
drop, drop, drop, drop." 
i too until i saw that french brocade 
blaze green as though some lizard in the shade 
became exact— 
set off by replicas of violet— 
like sidney, leaning in his striped jacket 
against a lime— 
a work of art. and i too seemed to be 
an insouciant rester by a tree— 
no daffodil. 
the arctic ox (or goat) 
derived from "golden fleece of the arctic," by john j. teal, jr., who rears musk oxen on his farm in vermont, as set forth in the march 1958 issue of the atlantic monthly. 
to wear the arctic fox 
you have to kill it. wear 
qiviut—the underwool of the arctic ox— 
pulled off it like a sweater; 
your coat is warm; your conscience, better. 
i would like a suit of 
qiviut, so light i did not 
know i had it on; and in the 
course of time, another 
since i had not had to murder 
the "goat" that grew the fleece 
that made the first. the musk ox 
has no musk and it is not an ox— 
illiterate epithet. 
bury your nose in one when wet. 
it smells of water, nothing else, 
and browses goatlike on 
hind legs. its great distinction 
is not egocentric scent 
but that it is intelligent. 
chinchillas, otters, water rats, 
and beavers keep us warm 
but think! a "musk ox" grows six pounds 
of qiviut; the cashmere ram, 
three ounces—that is all—of pashm. 
lying in an exposed spot, 
basking in the blizzard, 
these ponderosos could dominate 
the rare-hairs market in kashan and yet 
you could not have a choicer pet. 
they join you as you work; 
love jumping in and out of holes, 
play in water with the children, 
learn fast, know their names, 
will open gates and invent games. 
while not incapable 
of courtship, they may find its 
servitude and flutter, too much 
like procrustes’ bed; 
so some decide to stay unwed. 
camels are snobbish 
and sheep, unintelligent; 
water buffaloes, neurasthenic— 
even murderous. 
reindeer seem over-serious, 
whereas these scarce qivies, 
with golden fleece and winning ways, 
outstripping every fur-bearer— 
there in vermont quiet— 
could demand bold ruler’s diet: 
mountain valley water, 
dandelions, carrots, oats— 
encouraged as well—by bed 
made fresh three times a day, 
to roll and revel in the hay. 
insatiable for willow 
leaves alone, our goatlike 
qivi-curvi-capricornus 
sheds down ideal for a nest. 
song-birds find qiviut best. 
suppose you had a bag 
of it; you could spin a pound 
into a twenty-four-or-five- 
mile thread—one, forty-ply— 
that will not shrink in any dye. 
if you fear that you are 
reading an advertisement, 
you are. if we can’t be cordial 
to these creatures’ fleece, 
i think that we deserve to freeze. 
saint nicholas, 
might i, if you can find it, be given 
a chameleon with tail 
that curls like a watch spring; and vertical 
on the body—including the face—pale 
tiger-stripes, about seven; 
(the melanin in the skin 
having been shaded from the sun by thin 
bars; the spinal dome 
beaded along the ridge 
as if it were platinum). 
if you can find no striped chameleon, 
might i have a dress or suit— 
i guess you have heard of it—of qiviut? 
and to wear with it, a taslon shirt, the drip-dry fruit 
of research second to none; 
sewn, i hope, by excello; 
as for buttons to keep down the collar-points, no. 
the shirt could be white— 
and be "worn before six," 
either in daylight or at night. 
but don’t give me, if i can’t have the dress, 
a trip to greenland, or grim 
trip to the moon. the moon should come here. let him 
make the trip down, spread on my dark floor some dim 
marvel, and if a success 
that i stoop to pick up and wear, 
i could ask nothing more. a thing yet more rare, 
though, and different, 
would be this: hans von marées’ 
st. hubert, kneeling with head bent, 
form erect—in velvet, tense with restraint— 
hand hanging down: the horse, free. 
not the original, of course. give me 
a postcard of the scene—huntsman and divinity— 
hunt-mad hubert startled into a saint 
by a stag with a figure entined. 
but why tell you what you must have divined? 
saint nicholas, o santa claus, 
would it not be the most 
prized gift that ever was! 
for february 14th 
saint valentine, 
although late, would "some interested law 
impelled to plod in the poem’s cause" 
be unwelcome with a line? 
might you have liked a stone 
from a de beers consolidated mine? 
or badger-neat saber-thronged thistle 
of palestine—the leaves alone 
down’d underneath, 
worth a touch? or that mimosa-leafed vine 
called an "alexander’s armillary 
sphere" fanning out in a wreath? 
or did the ark 
preserve paradise-birds with jet-black plumes, 
whose descendants might serve as presents? 
but questioning is the mark 
of a pest! why think 
only of animals in connection 
with the ark or the wine noah drank? 
but that the ark did not sink. 
combat cultural 
one likes to see a laggard rook’s high 
speed at sunset to outfly the dark, 
or a mount well schooled for a medal— 
front legs tucked under for the barrier, 
or team of leapers turned aerial. 
i recall a documentary 
of cossacks: a visual fugue, a mist 
of swords that seemed to sever 
heads from bodies—feet stepping as through 
harp-strings in a scherzo. however, 
the quadrille of old russia for me: 
with aimlessly drooping handkerchief 
snapped like the crack of a whip; 
a deliriously spun-out-level 
frock-coat skirt, unswirled and a-droop 
in remote promenade. let me see … 
old russia, did i say? cold russia 
this time: the prize bunnyhug 
and platform-piece of experts in the 
trip-and-slug of wrestlers in a rug. 
"sacked" and ready for bed apparently— 
with a jab, a kick, pinned to the wall, 
they work toward the edge and stick; 
stagger off, and one is victim of a 
flipflop—leg having circled leg as thick. 
some art, because of high quality, 
is unlikely to command high sales; 
yes, no doubt; but here, oh no; 
not with the frozen north’s nan-ai-ans 
of the sack in their tight touch-and-go. 
these battlers, dressed identically— 
just one person—may, by seeming twins, 
point a moral, should i confess; 
we must cement the parts of any 
objective symbolic of sagesse. 
blue bug 
upon seeing dr. raworth williams’ blue bug with seven other ponies, photographed by thomas mcavoy: sports illustrated. 
in this camera shot, 
from that fine print in which you hide 
(eight-pony portrait from the side), 
you seem to recognize 
a recognizing eye, 
limber bug. 
only partly said, perhaps, it has been implied 
that you seem to be the one to ride. 
i don’t know how you got your name 
and don’t like to inquire. 
nothing more punitive than the pest 
who says, "i’m trespassing," and 
does it just the same. 
i’ve guessed, i think. 
i like a face that seems a nest, 
a "mere container for the eye"— 
triangle-cornered—and 
pitchfork-pronged ears stiffly parallel: 
bug brother to an arthur 
mitchell dragonfly, 
speeding to left, 
speeding to right; reversible, 
like "turns in an ancient chinese 
melody, a thirteen 
twisted silk-string three-finger solo." 
there they are, yellow riverscroll 
accuracies 
of your version 
of something similar—polo. 
restating it: 
pelo, i turn, 
on polos, a pivot. 
if a little elaborate, 
redon (odilon) brought it to mind, 
his thought of the eye, 
of revolving—combined somehow with pastime— 
pastime that is work, 
muscular docility, 
also mentality, 
as in the acrobat li siau than, 
gibbonlike but limberer, 
defying gravity, 
nether side arched up, 
cup on head not upset— 
china’s very most ingenious man. 
arthur mitchell 
slim dragonfly 
too rapid for the eye 
to cage— 
contagious gem of virtuosity— 
make visible, mentality. 
your jewels of mobility 
reveal 
and veil 
a peacock-tail 
the mind, intractable thing 
even with its own ax to grind, sometimes 
helps others. why can’t it help me? 
o imagnifico, 
wizard in words—poet, was it, as 
alfredo panzini defined you? 
weren’t you refracting just now 
on my eye’s half-closed triptych 
the image, enhanced, of a glen— 
"the foxgrape festoon as sere leaves fell" 
on the sand-pale dark byroad, one leaf adrift 
from the thin-twigged persimmon; again, 
a bird—arizona 
caught-up-with, uncatchable cuckoo 
after two hours’ pursuit, zigzagging 
road-runner, stenciled in black 
stripes all over, the tail 
windmilling up to defy me? 
you understand terror, know how to deal 
with pent-up emotion, a ballad, witchcraft. 
i don’t. o zeus and o destiny! 
unafraid of what’s done, 
undeterred by apparent defeat, 
you, imagnifico, unafraid 
of disparagers, death, dejection, 
have out-wiled the mermaid of zennor, 
made wordcraft irresistible: 
reef, wreck, lost lad, and "sea-foundered bell"— 
as near a thing as we have to a king— 
craft with which i don’t know how to deal. 
old amusement park 
before it became laguardia airport 
hurry, worry, unwary 
visitor, never vary 
the pressure till nearly bat-blind. 
a predicament so dire could not 
occur in this rare spot— 
where crowds flock to the tramcar, 
rattling greenish caterpillar, 
as bowling-ball thunder 
quivers the air. the park’s elephant 
slowly lies down aslant; 
then pygmy replica rides 
the mound the back provides. 
jet black, a furry pony sits 
down like a dog, has an innocent air— 
no tricks—the best act there. 
it’s all like the never-ending 
ferris-wheel ascending 
picket-fenced pony-rides (ten cents). 
a businessman, the pony-paddock boy 
locks his equestrian toy— 
flags flying, fares collected, 
shooting gallery neglected— 
half-official, half-sequestered, 
limber-slouched against a post, 
and tells a friend what matters least. 
it’s the old park in a nutshell, 
like its tame-wild carrousel— 
the exhilarating peak 
when the triumph is reflective 
and confusion, retroactive. 
charity overcoming envy 
(late-fifteenth-century tapestry, flemish or french, in the burrell collection, glasgow art gallery and museum) 
have you time for a story 
(depicted in tapestry)? 
charity, riding an elephant, 
on a "mosaic of flowers," faces envy, 
the flowers "bunched together, not rooted." 
envy, on a dog, is worn down by obsession, 
his greed (since of things owned by others 
he can only take some). crouching uneasily 
in the flowered filigree, among wide weeds 
indented by scallops that swirl, 
little flattened-out sunflowers, 
thin arched coral stems, and—ribbed horizontally— 
slivers of green, envy, on his dog, 
looks up at the elephant, 
cowering away from her, his cheek scarcely scratched. 
he is saying, "o charity, pity me, deity! 
o pitiless destiny, 
what will become of me, 
maimed by charity—caritas—sword unsheathed 
over me yet? blood stains my cheek. i am hurt." 
in chest armor over chain mail, a steel shirt 
to the knee, he repeats, "i am hurt." 
the elephant, at no time borne down by self-pity, 
convinces the victim 
that destiny is not devising a plot. 
the problem is mastered—insupportably 
tiring when it was impending. 
deliverance accounts for what sounds like an axiom. 
the gordian knot need not be cut. 
saint valentine, 
permitted to assist you, let me see … 
if those remembered by you 
are to think of you and not me, 
it seems to me that the memento 
or compliment you bestow 
should have a name beginning with "v," 
such as vera, el greco’s only 
daughter (though it has never been 
proved that he had one), her starchy 
veil, inside chiffon; the stone in her 
ring, like her eyes; one hand on 
her snow-leopard wrap, the fur widely 
dotted with black. it could be a vignette— 
a replica, framed oval— 
bordered by a vine or vinelet. 
or give a mere flower, said to mean the 
love of truth or truth of 
love—in other words, a violet. 
verse—unabashedly bold—is appropriate; 
and always it should be as neat 
as the most careful writer’s "8." 
any valentine that is written 
is as the vendange to the vine. 
might verse not best confuse itself with fate? 
i’ve been thinking ... 
make a fuss 
and be tedious. 
i’m annoyed? 
yes; am—avoid 
"adore" 
and "bore"; 
am, i 
say, by 
the word 
bore, bored; 
refuse 
to use 
"divine" 
to mean 
something 
pleasing; 
"terrific color" 
for some horror. 
though flat, 
myself, i’d say that 
"atlas" 
(pressed glass) 
looks best 
embossed. 
i refuse 
to use 
"enchant," 
"dement"; 
even "fright- 
ful plight" 
(however justified) 
or "frivol- 
ous fool" 
(however suitable). 
i’ve escaped? 
am still trapped 
by these 
word diseases. 
no pauses— 
the phrases 
lack lyric 
force; sound capric- 
like attic 
capric-alcaic, 
or freak 
calico-greek. 
(not verse 
of course) 
i’m sure of this: 
nothing mundane is divine; 
nothing divine is mundane. 
love in america? 
whatever it is, it’s a passion— 
a benign dementia that should be 
engulfing america, fed in a way 
the opposite of the way 
in which the minotaur was fed. 
it’s a midas of tenderness; 
from the heart; 
nothing else. from one with ability 
to bear being misunderstood— 
take the blame, with "nobility 
that is action," identifying itself with 
pioneer unperfunctoriness 
without brazenness or 
bigness of overgrown 
undergrown shallowness. 
whatever it is, let it be without 
affectation. 
yes, yes, yes, yes. 
tippoo’s tiger 
the tiger was his prototype. 
the forefeet of his throne were tiger’s feet. 
he mounted by a four-square pyramid of silver stairs converging as they rose. 
the jackets of his infantry and palace guard 
bore little woven stripes incurved like buttonholes. 
beneath the throne an emerald carpet lay. 
approaching it, each subject kissed nine times 
the carpet’s velvet face of meadow-green. 
tipu owned sixteen hunting-cats to course the antelope 
until his one great polecat ferret with exciting tail 
escaped through its unlatched hut-door along a plank 
above a ditch; paused, drank, and disappeared— 
precursor of its master’s fate. 
his weapons were engraved with tiger claws and teeth 
in spiral characters that said the conqueror is god. 
the infidel claimed tipu’s helmet and cuirasse 
and a vast toy, a curious automaton— 
a man killed by a tiger; with organ pipes inside 
from which blood-curdling cries merged with inhuman groans. 
the tiger moved its tail as the man moved his arm. 
this ballad still awaits a tiger-hearted bard. 
great losses for the enemy 
cannot make one’s own loss less hard. 
"like a wave at the curl" 
on a kind of christmas day— 
big flakes blurring everything, 
cat-power matching momentum, 
each kitten having capsized the other, 
one kitten fell; 
the other’s hind leg planted hard 
on the eye that had guided the onslaught— 
ears laid back, both tails lashing— 
a cynic might have said, "sir francis 
bacon defined it: 
‘foreign war is like the heat of exercise; 
civil war, like the heat of a fever.’" 
not at all. the expert would say, 
"rather hard on the fur." 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
whatever it is, it’s a passion— 
a benign dementia that should be 
engulfing america, fed in a way 
the opposite of the way 
in which the minotaur was fed. 
it’s a midas of tenderness; 
from the heart; 
nothing else. from one with ability 
to bear being misunderstood— 
take the blame, with "nobility 
that is action," identifying itself with 
pioneer unperfunctoriness 
without brazenness or 
bigness of overgrown 
undergrown shallowness. 
whatever it is, let it be without 
affectation. 
yes, yes, yes, yes. 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
this institution, 
perhaps one should say enterprise 
out of respect for which 
one says one need not change one’s mind 
about a thing one has believed in, 
requiring public promises 
of one’s intention 
to fulfill a private obligation: 
i wonder what adam and eve 
think of it by this time, 
this firegilt steel 
alive with goldenness; 
how bright it shows— 
"of circular traditions and impostures, 
committing many spoils," 
requiring all one’s criminal ingenuity 
to avoid! 
psychology which explains everything 
explains nothing 
and we are still in doubt. 
eve: beautiful woman— 
i have seen her 
when she was so handsome 
she gave me a start, 
able to write simultaneously 
in three languages— 
english, german and french 
and talk in the meantime; 
equally positive in demanding a commotion 
and in stipulating quiet: 
"i should like to be alone"; 
to which the visitor replies, 
"i should like to be alone; 
why not be alone together?" 
below the incandescent stars 
below the incandescent fruit, 
the strange experience of beauty; 
its existence is too much; 
it tears one to pieces 
and each fresh wave of consciousness 
is poison. 
"see her, see her in this common world," 
the central flaw 
in that first crystal-fine experiment, 
this amalgamation which can never be more 
than an interesting impossibility, 
describing it 
as "that strange paradise 
unlike flesh, gold, or stately buildings, 
the choicest piece of my life: 
the heart rising 
in its estate of peace 
as a boat rises 
with the rising of the water"; 
constrained in speaking of the serpent— 
that shed snakeskin in the history of politeness 
not to be returned to again— 
that invaluable accident 
exonerating adam. 
and he has beauty also; 
it’s distressing—the o thou 
to whom, from whom, 
without whom nothing—adam; 
"something feline, 
something colubrine"—how true! 
a crouching mythological monster 
in that persian miniature of emerald mines, 
raw silk—ivory white, snow white, 
oyster white and six others— 
that paddock full of leopards and giraffes— 
long lemon-yellow bodies 
sown with trapezoids of blue. 
alive with words, 
vibrating like a cymbal 
touched before it has been struck, 
he has prophesied correctly— 
the industrious waterfall, 
"the speedy stream 
which violently bears all before it, 
at one time silent as the air 
and now as powerful as the wind." 
"treading chasms 
on the uncertain footing of a spear," 
forgetting that there is in woman 
a quality of mind 
which as an instinctive manifestation 
is unsafe, 
he goes on speaking 
in a formal, customary strain 
of "past states, the present state, 
seals, promises, 
the evil one suffered, 
the good one enjoys, 
hell, heaven, 
everything convenient 
to promote one’s joy." 
there is in him a state of mind 
by force of which, 
perceiving what it was not 
intended that he should, 
"he experiences a solemn joy 
in seeing that he has become an idol." 
plagued by the nightingale 
in the new leaves, 
with its silence— 
not its silence but its silences, 
he says of it: 
"it clothes me with a shirt of fire." 
"he dares not clap his hands 
to make it go on 
lest it should fly off; 
if he does nothing, it will sleep; 
if he cries out, it will not understand." 
unnerved by the nightingale 
and dazzled by the apple, 
impelled by "the illusion of a fire 
effectual to extinguish fire," 
compared with which 
the shining of the earth 
is but deformity—a fire 
"as high as deep as bright as broad 
as long as life itself," 
he stumbles over marriage, 
"a very trivial object indeed" 
to have destroyed the attitude 
in which he stood— 
the ease of the philosopher 
unfathered by a woman. 
unhelpful hymen! 
"a kind of overgrown cupid" 
reduced to insignificance 
by the mechanical advertising 
parading as involuntary comment, 
by that experiment of adam’s 
with ways out but no way in— 
the ritual of marriage, 
augmenting all its lavishness; 
its fiddle-head ferns, 
lotus flowers, opuntias, white dromedaries, 
its hippopotamus— 
nose and mouth combined 
in one magnificent hopper, 
"the crested screamer— 
that huge bird almost a lizard," 
its snake and the potent apple. 
he tells us 
that "for love 
that will gaze an eagle blind, 
that is like a hercules 
climbing the trees 
in the garden of the hesperides, 
from forty-five to seventy 
is the best age," 
commending it 
as a fine art, as an experiment, 
a duty or as merely recreation. 
one must not call him ruffian 
nor friction a calamity— 
the fight to be affectionate: 
"no truth can be fully known 
until it has been tried 
by the tooth of disputation." 
the blue panther with black eyes, 
the basalt panther with blue eyes, 
entirely graceful— 
one must give them the path— 
the black obsidian diana 
who "darkeneth her countenance 
as a bear doth, 
causing her husband to sigh," 
the spiked hand 
that has an affection for one 
and proves it to the bone, 
impatient to assure you 
that impatience is the mark of independence 
not of bondage. 
"married people often look that way"— 
"seldom and cold, up and down, 
mixed and malarial 
with a good day and bad." 
"when do we feed?" 
we occidentals are so unemotional, 
we quarrel as we feed; 
one’s self quite lost, 
the irony preserved 
in "the ahasuerus tête à tête banquet" 
with its "good monster, lead the way," 
with little laughter 
and munificence of humor 
in that quixotic atmosphere of frankness 
in which "four o’clock does not exist 
but at five o’clock 
the ladies in their imperious humility 
are ready to receive you"; 
in which experience attests 
that men have power 
and sometimes one is made to feel it. 
he says, "what monarch would not blush 
to have a wife 
with hair like a shaving-brush? 
the fact of woman 
is not ‘the sound of the flute 
but very poison." 
she says, "‘men are monopolists 
of stars, garters, buttons 
and other shining baubles’— 
unfit to be the guardians 
of another person’s happiness." 
he says, "these mummies 
must be handled carefully— 
‘the crumbs from a lion’s meal, 
a couple of shins and the bit of an ear’; 
turn to the letter m 
and you will find 
that ‘a wife is a coffin,’ 
that severe object 
with the pleasing geometry 
stipulating space and not people, 
refusing to be buried 
and uniquely disappointing, 
revengefully wrought in the attitude 
of an adoring child 
to a distinguished parent." 
she says, "this butterfly, 
this waterfly, this nomad 
that has ‘proposed 
to settle on my hand for life.’— 
what can one do with it? 
there must have been more time 
in shakespeare’s day 
to sit and watch a play. 
you know so many artists who are fools." 
he says, "you know so many fools 
who are not artists." 
the fact forgot 
that "some have merely rights 
while some have obligations," 
he loves himself so much, 
he can permit himself 
no rival in that love. 
she loves herself so much, 
she cannot see herself enough— 
a statuette of ivory on ivory, 
the logical last touch 
to an expansive splendor 
earned as wages for work done: 
one is not rich but poor 
when one can always seem so right. 
what can one do for them— 
these savages 
condemned to disaffect 
all those who are not visionaries 
alert to undertake the silly task 
of making people noble? 
this model of petrine fidelity 
who "leaves her peaceful husband 
only because she has seen enough of him"– 
that orator reminding you, 
"i am yours to command." 
"everything to do with love is mystery; 
it is more than a day’s work 
to investigate this science." 
one sees that it is rare— 
that striking grasp of opposites 
opposed each to the other, not to unity, 
which in cycloid inclusiveness 
has dwarfed the demonstration 
of columbus with the egg— 
a triumph of simplicity— 
that charitive euroclydon 
of frightening disinterestedness 
which the world hates, 
admitting: 
"i am such a cow, 
if i had a sorrow, 
i should feel it a long time; 
i am not one of those 
who have a great sorrow 
in the morning 
and a great joy at noon"; 
which says: "i have encountered it 
among those unpretentious 
protegés of wisdom, 
where seeming to parade 
as the debater and the roman, 
the statesmanship 
of an archaic daniel webster 
persists to their simplicity of temper 
as the essence of the matter: 
‘liberty and union 
now and forever’; 
the book on the writing-table; 
the hand in the breast-pocket. 
growing up, i 
did not have books 
the only reading material 
there was 
were old newspapers laid out 
on the floor 
to dry 
our winter boots 
or wrap 
things of glass 
when i learned to read, 
the winter boots 
lay dripping 
in the hallway; 
the glass, broken 
and uncovered 
because i knew this 
this 
would be my way in 
the mayor's accountant was as humourless 
as a glass of snow. 
a glass of snow was on the lawn. 
the tongues of the deer 
are the tongues of the gods 
according to local legend. 
the deer, growing brave, 
dipped their little tongues into the glass 
while the mayor's accountant 
holidayed with his shame. 
he put a gun to his mouth 
as the sun shone in boca raton. 
snowfall continued at home. 
the mayor's spiel was the same. 
they all had names like jennifer or lynne 
or katherine; they all had bone-blonde hair, 
that wet, flat cut with bangs. they pulled your chair 
from underneath you, shoved their small fists in 
your face. too soon, you knew it would begin, 
those minkish teeth like shrapnel in the air, 
the bacchic taunts, the herculean dare, 
their soccer cleats against your porcine shin, 
that laugh, which sounded like a hundred birds 
escaping from a gunshot through the reeds— 
and now you have to face it all again: 
the joyful freckled faces lost for words 
in supermarkets, as those red hands squeeze 
your own. it's been so long! they say. amen. 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
winked too much and were afraid of snakes. the zebras, supreme in 
their abnormality; the elephants with their fog-colored skin 
and strictly practical appendages 
were there, the small cats; and the parakeet— 
trivial and humdrum on examination, destroying 
bark and portions of the food it could not eat. 
i recall their magnificence, now not more magnificent 
than it is dim. it is difficult to recall the ornament, 
speech, and precise manner of what one might 
call the minor acquaintances twenty 
years back; but i shall not forget him—that gilgamesh among 
the hairy carnivora—that cat with the 
wedge-shaped, slate-gray marks on its forelegs and the resolute tail, 
astringently remarking: "they have imposed on us with their pale 
half fledged protestations, trembling about 
in inarticulate frenzy, saying 
it is not for us to understand art; finding it 
all so difficult, examining the thing 
as if it were inconceivably arcanic, as symmet- 
rically frigid as if it had been carved out of chrysoprase 
or marble—strict with tension, malignant 
in its power over us and deeper 
than the sea when it proffers flattery in exchange for hemp, 
rye, flax, horses, platinum, timber, and fur. 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
she remembers only her dreaming. refashions herself 
in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
changed and replaced it before she woke. i, too, am at 
her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
part of the dream. she cannot see me lying waterlogged 
on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
walks by. it doesn't matter what i am. there is a certain 
pleasure in that. 
killarnoe 
killarnoe is a place i invented right 
now. i just built it from my head. i started 
with a letter k and set down the letters 
that spilled out. what does that say when k-i-l-l 
first sprouts? something repressed, or 
an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
free reign, opens to its own mind 
and speaks bluntly? but see how i persisted 
past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
and a silent e watching without judgement. 
you’ve seen a strawberry 
that’s had a struggle; yet 
was, where the fragments met, 
a hedgehog or a starfish 
for the multitude 
of seeds. what better food 
than apple-seeds—the fruit 
within the fruit—locked in 
like counter-curved twin 
hazel-nuts? frost that kills 
the little rubber-plant- 
leaves of kok-saghyz-stalks, can’t 
harm the roots; they still grow 
in frozen ground. once where 
there was a prickly-pear- 
leaf clinging to barbed wire, 
a root shot down to grow 
in earth two feet below; 
as carrots form mandrakes 
or a ram’s-horn root some- 
times. victory won’t come 
to me unless i go 
to it; a grape-tendril 
ties a knot in knots till 
knotted thirty times,—so 
the bound twig that’s under- 
gone and over-gone, can’t stir. 
the weak overcomes its 
menace, the strong over- 
comes itself. what is there 
like fortitude! what sap 
went through that little thread 
to make the cherry red! 
arranged by two’s as peaches are, 
at intervals that all may live— 
eight and a single one, on twigs that 
grew the year before—they look like 
a derivative; 
although not uncommonly 
the opposite is seen— 
nine peaches on a nectarine. 
fuzzless through slender crescent leaves 
of green or blue—or both, 
in the chinese style—the four 
pairs’ half-moon leaf-mosaic turns 
out to the sun the sprinkled blush 
of puce-american-beauty pink 
applied to beeswax gray by the 
unenquiring brush 
of mercantile bookbinding. 
like the peach yu, the red- 
cheeked peach which cannot aid the dead, 
but eaten in time prevents death, 
the italian peachnut, 
persian plum, ispahan 
secluded wall-grown nectarine, 
as wild spontaneous fruit was 
found in china first. but was it wild? 
prudent de candolle would not say. 
we cannot find flaws 
in this emblematic group 
of nine, with leaf window 
unquilted by curculio— 
which someone once depicted on 
this much-mended plate; or 
in the also accurate 
unantlered moose, or iceland horse, 
or ass, asleep against the old 
thick, low-leaning nectarine that is the 
color of the shrub-tree’s brownish 
flower. from manifold 
small boughs, productive as the 
magic willow that grew 
above the mother’s grave and threw 
on cinderella what she wished, 
a bat is winging. it 
is a moonlight scene, bringing 
the animal so near, its eyes 
are separate from the face—mere 
delicately drawn gray discs, out from 
itself in space. imperial 
happiness lives here 
on the peaches of long life 
that make it permanent. 
a fungus could have meant 
long life; a crane, a stork, a dove. 
china, with flowers and birds 
and half-beasts, became the land 
of the best china-making first. 
hunts and domestic scenes occur 
in france on dinner-plates, signed on the 
back with a two-finned fish; england 
has an officer 
in jack-boots seated in a 
bosquet, the cow, the flock 
of sheep, the pheasant, the peacock 
sweeping near with lifted claw; the 
skilled peonian rose 
and the rosebud that began 
with william billingsley (once poor, 
like a monkey on a dolphin, tossed 
by ocean, mighty monster) until 
josiah spode adopted him. 
yet with the gold-glossed 
serpent handles, are there green 
cocks with "brown beaks and cheeks 
and dark blue combs" and mammal freaks 
that, like the chinese certainties 
and sets of precious things, 
dare to be conspicuous? 
theirs is a race that "understands 
the spirit of the wilderness" 
and the nectarine-loving kylin 
of pony appearance—the long- 
tailed or the tailless 
small cinnamon-brown common 
camel-haired unicorn 
with antelope feet and no horn, 
here enamelled on porcelain. 
it was a chinese who 
imagined this masterpiece. 
ben johnson said he was? "o i could still 
like melting snow upon some craggy hill, 
drop, drop, drop, drop." 
i too until i saw that french brocade 
blaze green as though some lizard in the shade 
became exact— 
set off by replicas of violet— 
like sidney, leaning in his striped jacket 
against a lime— 
a work of art. and i too seemed to be 
an insouciant rester by a tree— 
no daffodil. 
"no water so still as the 
dead fountains of versailles." no swan, 
with swart blind look askance 
and gondoliering legs, so fine 
as the chintz china one with fawn- 
brown eyes and toothed gold 
collar on to show whose bird it was. 
lodged in the louis fifteenth 
candelabrum-tree of cockscomb- 
tinted buttons, dahlias, 
sea-urchins, and everlastings, 
it perches on the branching foam 
of polished sculptured 
flowers—at ease and tall. the king is dead. 
perceiving that in the masked ball 
attitude, there is a hollowness 
that beauty’s light momentum can’t redeem, 
since disproportionate satisfaction anywhere 
lacks a proportionate air, 
he let us know without offense 
by his hands’ denunciatory 
upheaval, that he despised the fashion 
of curing us with an ape—making it his care 
to smother us with fresh air. 
fists in our sleeves, we reach our limit. no way 
past lake ontario, nothing else to do 
until you say the thing you need to say. 
sweeten it if you like. stir in a name. 
it's only talk and we've talked our heads to 
foam before, testing the limit in a way. 
like the last time our four feet inched partway 
over the city's ledge. lightheaded you 
started to say something you needed to say 
then started again, we could– we can fly one way. 
right over the lake. how you said it, as if we were two 
wild geese, no credit limit in the way. ain't no way, 
i said. way. no way. way. tonight at the lake 
your courage fails again. knuckles in your pits, you 
flap your arms and squawk. say what you're dying to say. 
of course, don't. we're getting carried away. 
we'll stay this side of lake ontario, clenched. nous 
sommes à la limite de l'amitié – find a way 
to translate. if you won't say, i won't say. 
anatomize their work 
in the sense in which will honeycomb was jilted by a duchess, 
the little assumptions of the scared ego confusing the issue 
so that they do not know "whether it is the buyer or the seller who gives the money"— 
an abstruse idea plain to none but the artist, 
the only seller who buys, and holds on to the money. 
because one expresses oneself and entitles it wisdom, one is not a fool. what an idea! 
"dracontine cockatrices, perfect and poisonous from the beginning," 
they present themselves as a contrast to sea-serpented regions "unlit by the half-lights of more conscious art." 
acquiring at thirty what at sixty they will be trying to forget, 
blind to the right word, deaf to satire 
which like "the smell of the cypress strengthens the nerves of the brain," 
averse from the antique 
with "that tinge of sadness about it which a reflective mind always feels, 
it is so little and so much"— 
they write the sort of thing that would in their judgment interest a lady; 
curious to know if we do not adore each letter of the alphabet that goes to make a word of it— 
according to the act of congress, the sworn statement of the treasurer and all the rest of it— 
the counterpart to what we are: 
stupid man; men are strong and no one pays any attention: 
stupid woman; women have charm and how annoying they can be. 
yes, "the authors are wonderful people, particularly those that write the most," 
the masters of all languages, the supertadpoles of expression. 
accustomed to the recurring phosphorescence of antiquity, 
the "much noble vagueness and indefinite jargon" of plato, 
the lucid movements of the royal yacht upon the learned scenery of egypt— 
king, steward, and harper seated amidships while the jade and the rock crystal course about in solution, 
their suavity surmounts the surf— 
the willowy wit, the transparent equation of isaiah, jeremiah, ezekiel, daniel. 
bored by "the detailless perspective of the sea," reiterative and naive, 
and its chaos of rocks—the stuffy remarks of the hebrews— 
the good and alive young men demonstrate the assertion 
that it is not necessary to be associated with that which has bored one; 
they have never made a statement which they found so easy to prove— 
"split like a glass against a wall" 
in this "precipitate of dazzling impressions, 
the spontaneous unforced passion of the hebrew language— 
an abyss of verbs full of reverberations and tempestuous energy," 
in which action perpetuates action and angle is at variance with angle 
till submerged by the general action; 
obscured by "fathomless suggestions of color," 
by incessantly panting lines of green, white with concussion, 
in this drama of water against rocks—this "ocean of hurrying consonants" 
with its "great livid stains like long slabs of green marble," 
its "flashing lances of perpendicular lightning" and "molten fires swallowed up," 
"with foam on its barriers," 
"crashing itself out in one long hiss of spray. 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
transition 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
tu me manques 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
under construction 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
union station 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
witch hunt 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 
racter poems 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
uninhabited 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
injun 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
omnivore 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
on day and night (james arthur) 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
the sympathy of angels 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
a local history 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
love is a moontime teaching 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
mornings with the one glove 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
feel happier in nine seconds 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
water glass 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
african evening 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
homecoming 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
happiness is not the only happiness 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
ideal world 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
if you see it what is it you see 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
the myth of orpheus 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
the meaning of life 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
the ship 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
part of the main 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
iain lachlan campbell 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
et in arcadia ego 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
the fifth season 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
funny 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
victoria soto 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
harvest moon lantern festival 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
pastorals in the atrium 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
self storage 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
repose 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
pender and hamilton 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
little voice 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
amygdala 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
anniversary 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
there must be a name for this 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
terra nova, terraformed 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
look book 
over there on the green 
lawn under a sick pine 
is the body of the bird 
his plumage blue when 
i go to look at him and 
wonder if he's dead but 
his chest sort of heaves 
so i bend down closer 
look how the breast 
of the bird splits open 
and a fist of maggots 
spills out on the grass 
a necklace of sticky 
pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
and shining in the july 
light invertebrates that 
form an anecdote before 
i go back into our clapboard 
house to look at the sears 
catalogue and dream 
i am a girl posed into 
happiness look at me 
here now in this new 
dress i've bought with my 
own money at age twenty 
in the city when the cops 
question me i flash my 
passport thinking of 
lichen inching down 
a branch of a tree over 
the town river when i was 
small and somewhere my 
birth father is drunk and 
homeless, half-mad when 
the cops ask for his name 
he'll say, december 
beauty 
beauty is my irreparable and today i became geometric. 
a faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of first principles. 
in a whiteout of atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
vein of euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
surrounded me. i genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father's jaundice, for i am a good daughter of the colony. 
the colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
i should service or else receive a lesser dessert. with my smudge 
cleanse at the ready i find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
to time, or i'm out of it, entirely. chanting hell as hair veils 
my face as if this is a western. come polygon and i circumvent 
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. holy i went, holy 
all around my head, the holy i am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. striated by the pinnacle 
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
of its gravity. you can scan the ground from overhead for death 
pits. i read this on the internet when i was dehydrated, lonely, 
and afraid. office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition's patent heart. i've gone and been abominable. 
a column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
at the edges of my system an anishinabek or indo-european 
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
space of animal magnetism. white pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. oh, inconsequent curb 
of my street i refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
charged with trafficking. still waiting to be ordained, i make 
mask of our features that are retreating. plush pockets of rust 
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. i've gone 
and got a blister. that summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
porch. a half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. so i continue 
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where i am only just alive. 
bozo, today is over. 
a wake 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
i've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
your eyes open the night's slow static. at a loss 
to understand all that i cannot say, as if you came 
upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
if i moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
will return to me what i lost learning to speak. 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
as long as you hold me i am doubled from without and within: 
a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
i will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once i see 
your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
broken on a shore of cedar. we twist in a wake of fog. 
self-portrait cemetery 
there was no precedent 
just a headache, despair, three 
cans of asahi plastic-bagged and 
there they were: 
most punched into the earth like 
square stud earrings, 
the rest pushed out, erect, 
fake flowers at their base the most 
colourful pubic hair. 
one grave said lagos, nigeria so i stood 
by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
of my hand. 
i was the only live body around. 
they moved my friends 
into the chicken coop. 
and where are the chickens? 
i wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
and i wished for the donkeys— 
i wished something very large for the donkeys. 
i am a donkey. 
there was ginger ale, coke zero, 
and mexican beer 
on the small cart of the small donkey. 
the large and 
heavy head of a 
donkey 
covered in several burlap sacks. 
nausicaa 
she remembers only her dreaming. refashions herself 
in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
changed and replaced it before she woke. i, too, am at 
her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
part of the dream. she cannot see me lying waterlogged 
on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
walks by. it doesn't matter what i am. there is a certain 
pleasure in that. 
killarnoe 
killarnoe is a place i invented right 
now. i just built it from my head. i started 
with a letter k and set down the letters 
that spilled out. what does that say when k-i-l-l 
first sprouts? something repressed, or 
an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
free reign, opens to its own mind 
and speaks bluntly? but see how i persisted 
past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
and a silent e watching without judgement. 
killarnoe, i decide, is the land 
of our ancient people. 
ah 
an open moment, 
a prolonging 
of notice 
without reaction, a downward 
fountain of data, filling. 
unclosing, throat's 
wholeness, wide, 
to swallow 
the thrall of all of it: 
full bulge of gulp 
held— 
nothing undulating, no 
void vacuum 
pursuing a present cud 
through 
a human tunnel. 
sustained hum, 
sustenance 
pouring, not pulsing. 
rinse without erosion, 
flush without the closed 
push of peristalsis. 
clarity 
not needing blur 
to know itself. 
armadillo 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
i am in love with your brother 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
the masturbating flowers 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
the pinata 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
the internet 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
foley artist 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
voodoo hypothesis 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
keepers of paradise 
this is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
this is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
the river that runs from eden mouth 
to rare unsweetened mouth. 
i've logged the sour dawns of all 
my quiet into this body, 
its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
and reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
in the morse events of smallest things 
in my new metropolis away. 
i am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
call me isobar. distraction in place of earth. 
call me tropical depression 
where i regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
i'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
but enough. hear morne d'or divinize her song. 
give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom. 
don draper 
moths feather your far gazebo 
like young sailors on first leave. 
you know something, and keep reminding me 
of my own needs. you see an audience 
of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
and act accordingly. the swallows see it at five o'clock, 
a wolfman's tragedy. 
they hang themselves upside down, 
handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
swayed by a summer night, i swing out 
to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
a bird about-face. you're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 
poseurs 
the walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
moths, with brown wings the prize of 
asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
that peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
would come down from the morello cherry long after sunset; 
after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
for some caliph's odalisque 
or the low-stress oregonian monkey puzzles, 
a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
propose new kinds of orgasm. 
walking stick insects 
were squibs from the natural world, 
little stand-up comics 
fashioned after mutineered twigs. given half a chance, 
the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
wordsworth or nietzsche. like the wives of 17th century 
men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
dividing their time between joy and sloth. 
stranger 
a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
in their party dresses, all yelling, "don't run! don't run!" 
laughing and looking like they were having 
the time of their lives. i noticed one girl 
near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
for no other reason than itself. lost now too, 
sitting in 14b in pashmina and dark glasses, 
i might as well be the smyrna merchant. 
i've never been good at small talk; 
besides which, we'll be in new york in about an hour. 
later that night, i remembered the way she laughed 
as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
was the first thing i saw when i woke. it seems now 
she'd shown me what had come to me once 
and was now gone. travelling from montréal over a month ago, 
i can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
they didn't admit the syrian poet scheduled 
to lecture at nyu two days before. i small-talked 
the homeland security officer about his upcoming trip 
to guelph, ontario, where his wife's from. 
love, another poet once claimed, 
could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
what's been lost, and what i understood was 
that the vase, if put back together, 
becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
we might lose again, and so we do. 
i don't stick to the facts— 
what if i wrote lines that took nothing 
but the shape of my thoughts? 
no irritable reaching for an old story, 
no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
a rail bridge connects the old playground 
to the abandoned car lot—i say that knowing 
i don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
is that poetic license? it's not something i need to know, 
this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
the sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the hudson. 
they call it stranger's weather. 
i rather think i did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
i asked too—not about a better view; 
about someone entirely different, about what remains 
after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel. 
appetites 
you wake hearing the girl next door come in at two a.m. 
in the event that it's a ghost, it's telling you 
not to waste time in bed 
worrying. 
you should be sleeping, or doing 
anything else. 
you haven't yet seen the faun, the red fox, 
or the rabbit. 
the statue of a woman in the lily-padded lake is waist-deep, 
a mimicry of diana's animal life, suspicious of sleep. 
with her in mind, you're troubled even thinking of things 
that don't frighten you. 
but this, too, is a waste of time and talent. 
there is good slumber 
to be sought in the rush of ruminations outside yourself: 
in listlessness of reeds on the dead embankment, 
in languor of bee by a late marigold 
or duck feathers gathering in a corner of falling 
water. 
you realize you haven't organized your life. 
you've forgotten yourself entirely. 
you wake up and try to pick up the thread. 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
mouth open, she looked as though she was protesting 
her inclusion. i brought her to a place 
where no one speaks. there's been a mistake, 
she said with the soft folds 
of her tracksuit, the car keys 
she held like a set of brass knuckles. 
you can't take me anywhere i don't wish to go. 
i did have to drive out of town to take this picture. 
as evidence, it was the next day's news. 
now it's so obvious, her clavicle's hard line, 
the shadow there, a hollow big enough for two thumbs. 
skipping stones 
i fling flat stones into the surf, corral 
my anger in the strangely angled pose. 
each beat's concentric blip a sound so odd 
it clarifies the brine to mellow blues. 
my mother's ex once skimmed his bottle caps 
down at the lake; not littering, i thought, 
the glinting disc's fourteen discrete hop-hops. 
now i trust black, the solid strength of rock. 
my hand must learn the pebble's weight, and know 
which chips will change the shape and spoil the trick; 
this can't be accurately guessed, and though 
some seem to work without my gauging it; 
i fling them to new ocean bottom homes, 
and some i leave to dry upon the beach. skip stones. 
party music 
in '68 a great conductor came 
to one small european town. his flat 
was right above our gran's. he reeked of fame, 
wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
a coat in astrakhan. a man like that 
deserved the name of meister. appetite 
for drama and excitement won at last; 
we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
the aura of an enigmatic past 
(unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
of swissness. we could only speculate; 
he was a mighty river with no source. 
but we had watched him leave the building late: 
a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
had scooped him up, a russian at his side. 
an undernourished blonde in mink. of course. 
what more could any human being provide? 
we had it figured out. we knew this man 
was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
salvation for the suffering of gran, 
whose patience was as solid as the stones 
on via maestra. so we made a plan, 
imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
notified (a buzz between two phones), 
down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
although our minds had not digested sex, 
we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
he'd ring the bell, come in for tea. the next 
instalment of our hot imaginings: 
her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
(insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
his man-purse chucked aside! like mighty wings 
those sideburns swooped on in. oh, great abyss 
she toppled into, blown by some gust 
of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
all this for romance in the upper crust, 
a man above domestic life's dull take, 
a mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
party member, the phrase of cold 
and adult truth was just one part left out 
of what the two of us were later told. 
it wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
for party used to mean the happy mess, 
the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
but now we heard the coda of distress: 
the rattle of a door against a chair, 
the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
no nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
the strains of the horst wessel lied instead. 
because, of course, the party wasn't ours. 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
they all had names like jennifer or lynne 
or katherine; they all had bone-blonde hair, 
that wet, flat cut with bangs. they pulled your chair 
from underneath you, shoved their small fists in 
your face. too soon, you knew it would begin, 
those minkish teeth like shrapnel in the air, 
the bacchic taunts, the herculean dare, 
their soccer cleats against your porcine shin, 
that laugh, which sounded like a hundred birds 
escaping from a gunshot through the reeds— 
and now you have to face it all again: 
the joyful freckled faces lost for words 
in supermarkets, as those red hands squeeze 
your own. it's been so long! they say. amen. 
radio 
the kitchen dark, the summer night air warm, 
and my father at the kitchen table, radio 
turned down low, alone, listening to baseball. 
my mother and i come inside from our swim, 
toweling off. the crowd is restless. long silences 
between pitches in the play-by-play. 
look how he holds the radio in both hands 
like a steering wheel, thumb on the tuning dial 
to catch the wavering channel, fighting static. 
his eyes glitter like a field of fireflies. 
prague 
someone had left a mannequin in the street. 
it was wearing a wedding dress 
and—but no, 
it was a woman, standing on a box. 
a small crowd had gathered around her 
and her eyes were closed. 
i hesitated. then 
reached down to the jar at her feet 
as if i were bending to pet a stranger's dog. 
and as though i had deposited a soul, chink, 
her eyelids fluttered open, 
her fingers flickered, 
she awoke like hermione 
astonishing her husband 
in the miraculous final scene of the winter's tale. 
later, through the window of a restaurant, 
i saw her dash across a crowded street, 
clutching her skirts to keep them from the rain. 
redbird 
it's the middle of the night. 
i've set the house on fire 
with those matches i love, 
the ones in the kitchen 
with the red bird on the box. 
you can strike them anywhere. 
allumettes qui s'allument partout. 
take care: may ignite if box is 
dropped, shaken, or crushed. 
this same bird flies through 
a tattoo on your arm. 
the house is burning down 
and i am thinking of boats. 
you hate the matches, the smell 
of bent, black spoons. 
i light one and it falls to the floor. 
another and another. take care. 
i don't know what to save 
from this place, sailing from wall 
to wall, room to room, smoking. 
you are not here. you are rain 
battering against some window. 
i don't know what to save. 
the red bird eats everything in sight. 
snake handler 
no tricks, 
i just love them 
as my own blood 
and keep my eyes 
on the ceiling. 
o brothers, i sing, 
your bodies are thick 
as wrists, your skins 
my only book. 
i relieve them 
of poison, 
i undo what they do. 
i'm charcoal and paper. 
touch me: i leave 
a mark on your hand. 
this is just costume, 
my depression dress, 
my buckled shoe. 
tin flowers in my ears 
play spiral-groove blues. 
song of the last shaker 
one line, 
two line, 
three line, 
plane. 
i skate across the lake on a bone-made blade. 
my spine is an arrow, a leg of his chair. 
my nose straight and narrow and long 
as my hair. 
my body's for bruising. 
my heart is her sky. 
i train my breath 
upwards. 
i practice. 
i die. 
the trouble with wormholes 
how many times must i learn the lesson of compression? 
let go of everything you know and start from scratch. 
one friend performing backbends on a beach while another 
snaps his tibia on an icy patch of saskatchewan. i don't think 
i'm suffering, my days a series of unexpected gifts punctuated 
by a blast of the family rage shot deep into my soft plexus. 
it occurs to me i don't have to be so many people. if you're staying 
alive spinning stories, it's suddenly a skill that you talk too much. 
i'm not sure it's smart to unlock the portal. the reformed raver 
claimed he saw my inner wheels spin. red cloud, are there wars 
where you are? your great-great-grandson appeared on democracy 
now! with a plan. will my generation be remembered for anything 
i haven't forgotten? they mine the hills for gold, they mine the hills 
for uranium, and all around the world, columns are cracking. 
i've watched you soar all day. please teach me how you do that. 
good day villanelle 
you ran naked out the door. 
the neighbours laughed; i chased you down. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i know you're busy. 
did i tell you when you were little how 
you ran naked out the door? 
you got halfway down the street 
before i caught you in my arms. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i think i told you this before: 
i was giving you a bath and then 
you ran naked out the door. 
it happened fast. 
the neighbours laughed. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
you have to watch a baby close. 
i remember once— 
you ran naked out the door. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
i do not think that i could love a human being; i would not 
know it if i squeezed too hard. i would be a great bear. i would 
go rumbling through. 
i would try to eat you. i would stand alone, 
in the quiet centre of you, and roar. no, i 
could not love you. i could not 
love a human being. 
i would get so 
stuck on things. the small 
flaws in you, like 
the way that you will die; 
it would stick in my throat, i could not love you. 
and the way that, if you touched me, i would be 
as if to you a solid object, 
as if a boot, a stick, a stone. 
and you to me. the way that i could 
pick you up. that i could 
hammer you against me; that i could 
bruise myself on you, and still have only a 
brief impression of you left there on my skin. 
and, if i cried, that too would be 
an imitation of the thing that i would feel. 
and the pain itself, if it were real, would come as if 
so separately from you that it might 
equally have been a whip, a rope, 
a rail with which i thrashed myself when i 
thrashed myself with you. 
no, i could not love a human being if they 
could not leave a mark. 
even if i were a bear 
and i ate you, you would 
move right through me. 
even if you were a bear 
and you ate me, i would 
move right through you. 
but i am not a bear. and will not eat you. 
if i said i could, i could not. 
and you are not a bear. and will not eat me. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
materials 
growing up, i 
did not have books 
the only reading material 
there was 
were old newspapers laid out 
on the floor 
to dry 
our winter boots 
or wrap 
things of glass 
when i learned to read, 
the winter boots 
lay dripping 
in the hallway; 
the glass, broken 
and uncovered 
because i knew this 
this 
would be my way in 
at the farm 
i was sitting in the car counting the black flies 
they had come in through the open window 
there were four 
one was on the rear-view mirror 
the other three were perched on my left hand 
i heard a gunshot by the barn and thought nothing of it 
we were at a farm 
i saw a cow come charging forward with its head half gone 
a man with an axe came running behind it 
he hit it once 
once he hit it 
and it fell to the ground 
everything was eaten 
its eye appeared in a soup that night 
everything accounted for 
bare 
it means you are light, that you can begin differently now, that you've taken it 
all off 
it means to show your tooth and claw, without the work, the polish, the 
appointment 
if the ending were different, if you placed the last letter right after the 
beginning, it would be an animal, a power, a warning from which to stay away 
face to face, maybe you'd see they're really not all that different, both just 
trying 
a rearrangement, a shift, a move out of place, a spine realigned 
but it would take that wouldn't it? that face to face, to know 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
i should have propped something else beside it— 
an empty can, or the last half of my sandwich. 
as it stands, the cricket's size grows in the telling, 
spreads like the news, years ago, of abandoned stacks 
of dirty magazines stowed at the creek behind 
the street where i grew up. when my bicycle tires 
edged over the lip, boys were already clutching the rain- 
soaked pages in their fists, the ink of my first 
glimpses of flesh were already starting to pale, 
to bleed into the leaves. seriously, we'd say 
in the schoolyard, it was the coolest. later, actual 
clothing would melt off actual flesh; yes, melt, 
not just fall to the floor, because, seriously, she 
was the hottest. then gossip flares up in the yard's 
kindled corners. when she finally calls up, crying, 
i don't relay how her how could yous clutched 
at my throat, pinned me to the receiver, silent, ashamed, 
because i knew i'd been the worst. 
then what? i left, took a few bum jobs 
humping rich peoples' luggage, spent two years 
in seoul, korea, navigating through crowds 
where, for the first time, i was the tallest, 
so i stuck out to this gorgeous backpacker 
who speaks fluent italian, recites whole blocks 
of the inferno aloud, and moved in with her 
as soon as i came home, because, seriously, 
it felt like the real thing. though i'm no longer sure 
"real" is the right word, because it's years on, 
and i'm no longer sure of this house, or this town, 
or my job, and with her, lately, well let's just say 
this stretch has been tough. so i stuff the last three 
cans of a six-pack, a camera, and a sandwich 
into a knapsack, set out to hike along a creek 
where leaves brushing against my bare forearms 
still feel erotic. rambling, i turn this corner to find 
there, on a bare patch of dirt, the world's biggest cricket, 
this freakishly massive thing, and clutch at my mouth 
as the air fills with the orchestral swell of its legs, 
and gather myself enough to snap a single photo 
before it leaps so high i think it must be heading 
into someone else's life. shit, i whisper further on, 
realizing my shot on the bare patch will show nothing 
of its largeness. hear myself having to try to explain, 
struggling, because it was amazing, and, seriously, 
i've never been able to help myself. one way or another, 
i will have to try to tell her every single thing. 
earworm 
so there's likely a more accurate name 
for the glow of a deer's eyes in the dark. 
for the hunger that drew a python in florida 
to swallow an alligator whole. for the aura, 
the swell just before the gut burst. 
for why you've been staying up late at night 
on a search engine, looking for all of the possible 
names for a lump at the back of your nostril. 
for the name of that girl who sold you a pill 
from the basket of her bike, and rode off while 
her fairy wings flapped in the breeze. and a name 
for that breeze. repetune, ohrwurm, 
the last song stuck in your head 
which became something else. and for what else? 
for not being able to say the one thing 
that might have kept you from continually falling apart. 
for discovering late. for replaying the video clip 
of joltin' joe carter's ninth-inning blast 
in the '93 series. for the sound when the ball 
hit the bat, and everyone knew they'd won 
before it left the park. and for the white noise 
that isn't white noise, but a poor translation of what 
the blood tries to say. and what the blood tries to say. 
for the feeling of never wanting to leave the party 
and then having to leave. for the ache in your legs 
when you should have cabbed home, but decided to walk 
and the walk was too far. but you had to keep on— 
earworm, little one, chugging along, traveling towards a name. 
mayor snow 
the mayor's accountant was as humourless 
as a glass of snow. 
a glass of snow was on the lawn. 
the tongues of the deer 
are the tongues of the gods 
according to local legend. 
the deer, growing brave, 
dipped their little tongues into the glass 
while the mayor's accountant 
holidayed with his shame. 
he put a gun to his mouth 
as the sun shone in boca raton. 
snowfall continued at home. 
the mayor's spiel was the same. 
the walls 
we cannot act until we have all the facts. 
we will never have all the facts. we act. 
we expand the wall. we found others. 
they are living breathing streets, walls 
are. this fact arouses us to erect wall 
after wall. we think only of the walls. 
we think of the walls as stitches 
in a blown apart body. the stitches 
bring this body back together. the walls, 
embracing the globe, will do the same 
for us. if not, we will work until every 
body is walled off from every other 
body. think of the thrill we'll feel 
when we tear down those walls, excited 
by the sudden wall of bodies or the joy 
of building all those walls anew. 
through the restaurant window 
i can see from where i sit 
a freight train going by, rolling forward 
in the dark. i can't tell if it's one long train 
or a dozen—i close my eyes, listen. 
a freight train going by, rolling forward 
as our conversation backs up, bridges one gap 
or a dozen. i close my eyes, listen. 
there are gates within us, you say, 
as our conversation backs up, bridges a gap. 
you reach across the table, take my hand. 
there are gates within us, you say 
again. you're right, there's always a distance. 
you reach across the table, take my hand 
in the dark. i can't tell if it's one long train. 
again, you're right, there's always a distance. 
i can see from where i sit. 
we bought a little city 
first, we remove the dreadful yellow awnings from the shop-fronts in the square. 
brighten the streetlamps. play our instruments for the dairy cows crowding 
the fence. we angle for more daylight, fill out the appropriate paperwork. get 
down on hands and knees to clean out the ditches. we eat breaded fish for 
lunch, drink a cold beer, volunteer to play our part. no one complains of their 
dreams or dread. a mangy dog comes out of the forest covered in mud and 
stinking of deep time. belonging to the old owners, he wants nothing to do 
with us, knows we'll use him as a bridge: look, there he goes with a pheasant 
in his mouth. late october, the windows display ornamental gourds, tidy piles 
of leaves. evening in the forest, the eyes and mouths of jack-o-lanterns spark. 
a bark, a souvenir. way off the earth the moon muscles in, entirely invincible. 
self-portrait 
this cloud is designed 
to move like a cursor from one side of the room to the other 
this cloud is designed to float inside 
uncorrupted by weather 
this cloud is easy to capture 
and won't last forever 
the cloud exists without a wonder 
of what anyone thinks     we study 
the cloud to learn this indifference     little deadpan filibuster 
the cloud makes a sudden diagonal 
move to the corner 
the crowd fills the space 
attempts to mimic its very nature 
as if one (just by watching) might gain 
a foothold 
knowing "the end" placard 
is mounted in the not-so- 
distant future 
not saying 
fists in our sleeves, we reach our limit. no way 
past lake ontario, nothing else to do 
until you say the thing you need to say. 
sweeten it if you like. stir in a name. 
it's only talk and we've talked our heads to 
foam before, testing the limit in a way. 
like the last time our four feet inched partway 
over the city's ledge. lightheaded you 
started to say something you needed to say 
then started again, we could– we can fly one way. 
right over the lake. how you said it, as if we were two 
wild geese, no credit limit in the way. ain't no way, 
i said. way. no way. way. tonight at the lake 
your courage fails again. knuckles in your pits, you 
flap your arms and squawk. say what you're dying to say. 
of course, don't. we're getting carried away. 
we'll stay this side of lake ontario, clenched. nous 
sommes à la limite de l'amitié – find a way 
to translate. if you won't say, i won't say. 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
because it takes three hours and gives him the blues bad 
so not now, not now, later, he promises, then falls asleep 
on my couch, shrugging his upper lip like a horse. 
before it became laguardia airport 
hurry, worry, unwary 
visitor, never vary 
the pressure till nearly bat-blind. 
a predicament so dire could not 
occur in this rare spot— 
where crowds flock to the tramcar, 
rattling greenish caterpillar, 
as bowling-ball thunder 
quivers the air. the park’s elephant 
slowly lies down aslant; 
then pygmy replica rides 
the mound the back provides. 
jet black, a furry pony sits 
down like a dog, has an innocent air— 
no tricks—the best act there. 
it’s all like the never-ending 
ferris-wheel ascending 
picket-fenced pony-rides (ten cents). 
a businessman, the pony-paddock boy 
locks his equestrian toy— 
flags flying, fares collected, 
shooting gallery neglected— 
half-official, half-sequestered, 
limber-slouched against a post, 
and tells a friend what matters least. 
it’s the old park in a nutshell, 
like its tame-wild carrousel— 
the exhilarating peak 
when the triumph is reflective 
and confusion, retroactive. 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
if i, like solomon, … 
could have my wish— 
my wish ... o to be a dragon, 
a symbol of the power of heaven—of silkworm 
size or immense; at times invisible. 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
in '68 a great conductor came 
to one small european town. his flat 
was right above our gran's. he reeked of fame, 
wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
a coat in astrakhan. a man like that 
deserved the name of meister. appetite 
for drama and excitement won at last; 
we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
the aura of an enigmatic past 
(unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
of swissness. we could only speculate; 
he was a mighty river with no source. 
but we had watched him leave the building late: 
a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
had scooped him up, a russian at his side. 
an undernourished blonde in mink. of course. 
what more could any human being provide? 
we had it figured out. we knew this man 
was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
salvation for the suffering of gran, 
whose patience was as solid as the stones 
on via maestra. so we made a plan, 
imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
notified (a buzz between two phones), 
down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
although our minds had not digested sex, 
we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
he'd ring the bell, come in for tea. the next 
instalment of our hot imaginings: 
her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
(insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
his man-purse chucked aside! like mighty wings 
those sideburns swooped on in. oh, great abyss 
she toppled into, blown by some gust 
of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
all this for romance in the upper crust, 
a man above domestic life's dull take, 
a mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
party member, the phrase of cold 
and adult truth was just one part left out 
of what the two of us were later told. 
it wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
for party used to mean the happy mess, 
the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
but now we heard the coda of distress: 
the rattle of a door against a chair, 
the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
no nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
the strains of the horst wessel lied instead. 
because, of course, the party wasn't ours. 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
they answer one’s questions: 
a deal table compact with the wall; 
in this dried bone of arrangement, 
one’s "natural promptness" is compressed, not crowded out; 
one’s style is not lost in such simplicity: 
the palace furniture, so old fashioned, so old fashionable; 
sèvres china and the fireplace dogs— 
bronze dromios with pointed ears, as obsolete as pugs; 
one has one’s preference in the matter of bad furniture 
and this is not one’s choice: 
the vast indestructible necropolis 
of composite yawman-erbe separable units; 
the steel, the oak, the glass, the poor richard publications 
containing the public secrets of efficiency 
on "paper so thin that one thousand four hundred and twenty pages make one inch," 
exclaiming so to speak, when you take my time, you take something i had meant to use: 
the highway hid by fir trees in rhododendron twenty feet deep, 
the peacocks, hand-forged gates, old persian velvet— 
roses outlined in pale black on an ivory ground— 
the pierced iron shadows of the cedars, 
chinese carved glass, old waterford, 
lettered ladies; landscape gardening twisted into permanence: 
straight lines over such great distances as one finds in utah or in texas 
where people do not have to be told 
that "a good brake is as important as a good motor," 
where by means of extra sense cells in the skin, 
they can like trout, smell what is coming— 
those cool sirs with the explicit sensory apparatus of common sense, 
who know the exact distance between two points as the crow flies; 
there is something attractive about a mind that moves in a straight line— 
the municipal bat-roost of mosquito warfare, concrete statuary, 
medicaments for "instant beauty" in the hands of all, 
and that live wire, the american string quartet: 
and bluebeard’s tower above the coral reefs, 
the magic mousetrap closing on all points of the compass, 
capping like petrified surf, the furious azure of the bay 
where there is no dust and life is like a lemon-leaf, 
a green piece of tough translucent parchment, 
where the crimson, the copper, and the chinese vermilion of the poincianas 
set fire to the masonry and turquoise blues refute the clock; 
this dungeon with odd notions of hospitality, 
with its "chessmen carved out of moonstones," 
its mocking-birds, fringed lilies, and hibiscus, 
its black butterflies with blue half circles on their wings, 
tan goats with onyx ears, its lizards glittering and without thickness 
like splashes of fire and silver on the pierced turquoise of the lattices 
and the acacia-like lady shivering at the touch of a hand, 
lost in a small collision of the orchids— 
dyed quicksilver let fall 
to disappear like an obedient chameleon in fifty shades of mauve and amethyst: 
here where the mind of this establishment has come to the conclusion 
that it would be impossible to revolve about one’s self too much, 
sophistication has like "an escalator, cut the nerve of progress." 
in these noncommittal, personal-impersonal expressions of appearance, 
the eye knows what to skip; 
the physiognomy of conduct must not reveal the skeleton; 
"a setting must not have the air of being one" 
yet with x-raylike inquisitive intensity upon it, the surfaces go back; 
the interfering fringes of expression are but a stain on what stands out, 
there is neither up nor down to it; 
we see the exterior and the fundamental structure— 
captains of armies, cooks, carpenters, 
cutlers, gamesters, surgeons and armorers, 
lapidaries, silkmen, glovers, fiddlers and ballad-singers, 
sextons of churches, dyers of black cloth, hostlers and chimney-sweeps, 
queens, countesses, ladies, emperors, travelers and mariners, 
dukes, princes and gentlemen 
in their respective places— 
camps, forges and battlefields, 
conventions, oratories and wardrobes, 
dens, deserts, railway stations, asylums and places where engines are made, 
shops, prisons, brickyards and altars of churches— 
in magnificent places clean and decent, 
castles, palaces, dining-halls, theatres and imperial audience-chambers. 
strong and slippery, built for the midnight grass-party confronted by four cats, 
he sleeps his time away—the detached first claw on his foreleg which corresponds 
to the thumb, retracted to its tip; the small tuft of fronds 
or katydid legs above each eye, still numbering the units in each group; 
the shadbones regularly set about his mouth, to droop or rise 
in unison like the porcupine’s quills—motionless. he lets himself be flat- 
tened out by gravity, as it were a piece of seaweed tamed and weakened by 
exposure to the sun; compelled when extended, to lie 
stationary. sleep is the result of his delusion that one must do as 
well as one can for oneself; sleep—epitome of what is to 
him as to the average person, the end of life. demonstrate on him how 
the lady caught the dangerous southern snake, placing a forked stick on either 
side of its innocuous neck; one need not try to stir 
him up; his prune shaped head and alligator eyes are not a party to the 
joke. lifted and handled, he may be dangled like an eel or set 
up on the forearm like a mouse; his eyes bisected by pupils of a pin’s 
width, are flickeringly exhibited, then covered up. may be? i should say, 
might have been; when he has been got the better of in a 
dream—as in a fight with nature or with cats—we all know it. profound sleep is 
not with him, a fixed illusion. springing about with froglike ac- 
curacy, emitting jerky cries when taken in the hand, he is himself 
again; to sit caged by the rungs of a domestic chair would be unprofit- 
able—human. what is the good of hypocrisy? it 
is permissible to choose one’s employment, to abandon the wire nail, the 
roly-poly, when it shows signs of being no longer a pleas- 
ure, to score the adjacent magazine with a double line of strokes. he can 
talk, but insolently says nothing. what of it? when one is frank, one’s very 
presence is a compliment. it is clear that he can see 
the virtue of naturalness, that he is one of those who do not regard 
the published fact as a surrender. as for the disposition 
invariably to affront, an animal with claws wants to have to use 
them; that eel-like extension of trunk into tail is not an accident. to 
leap, to lengthen out, divide the air—to purloin, to pursue, 
to tell the hen: fly over the fence, go in the wrong way—in your perturbation— 
this is life; to do less would be nothing but dishonesty. 
literature is a phase of life: if 
one is afraid of it, the situation is irremediable; if 
one approaches it familiarly, 
what one says of it is worthless. words are constructive 
when they are true; the opaque allusion—the simulated flight 
upward—accomplishes nothing. why cloud the fact 
that shaw is self-conscious in the field of sentiment but is otherwise re- 
warding? that james is all that has been 
said of him, if feeling is profound? it is not hardy 
the distinguished novelist and hardy the poet, but one man 
"interpreting life through the medium of the 
emotions." if he must give an opinion, it is permissible that the 
critic should know what he likes. gordon 
craig with his "this is i" and "this is mine," with his three 
wise men, his "sad french greens" and his chinese cherries—gordon craig, so 
inclinational and unashamed—has carried 
the precept of being a good critic, to the last extreme; and burke is a 
psychologist—of acute, raccoon- 
like curiosity. summa diligentia; 
to the humbug, whose name is so amusing—very young and ve- 
ry rushed, caesar crossed the alps on the "top of a 
diligence." we are not daft about the meaning but this familiarity 
with wrong meanings puzzles one. humming- 
bug, the candles are not wired for electricity. 
small dog, going over the lawn, nipping the linen and saying 
that you have a badger—remember xenophon; 
only the most rudimentary sort of behavior necessary 
to put us on the scent; "a right good 
salvo of barks," a few "strong wrinkles" puckering the 
skin between the ears, are all we ask. 
older than the ancient greeks, than 
solomon, the pigeon family is a 
ramifying one, a 
banyan of banyans; to begin 
with, bluish slate, 
but with ability. modesty cannot dull 
the lustre of the pigeon 
swift and sure, coming quickest and 
straightest just after a storm. the great 
lame war hero cher ami, the 
lost battalion’s gallant bird; and 
mocker with one eye 
destroyed, delivering his dispatch 
to his superiors; and sergeant dunn, 
civilian pigeon who flew eight 
hundred sixty-eight miles 
in four days and six hours; 
and destined to hatch 
in france, spike, veteran of 
the division in which mocker 
served—exceptional messenger. 
"rarely was confidence misplaced" a newspaper 
says. dastardly comment 
inexactly phrased, as used of her- 
mes, ariel, or leander— 
pigeons of the past. neither was confidence 
misplaced in the javan- 
sumatran birds the dutch had had 
brought from baghdad. 
mysterious animal with a magnetic 
feel by which he traces backward 
his transportation outward, 
even in a fog at sea, though glad 
to be tossed near enough the loft 
or coop to get back the same day. 
"home on time without 
his message." what matter since he has 
got back. migrating always in the same 
direction, bringing all letters 
to the same address, see- 
ing better homes than his, 
he is not theudas 
boasting himself to be some- 
body, this anonymous post- 
man who, as soon as he could fly, 
was carrying valentines and messages of 
state; or soberer news— 
"so please write me and believe that i 
am yours very truly"; fine words 
those. an instrument not just an instinctive 
individual, this 
dove, that lifts his right foot over 
the alighting- 
board to rejoin his ungainly pin-clad dark-skinned 
brood as domestic turtle- 
doves might; two. invariably 
two. the turtle, a not exciting 
bird—in britain shy, detected 
by its constantly heard coo, with- 
out a song but not 
without a voice—does well to stay far 
out of sight; but the pelew pigeon with 
black head, metallic wasp-lustred 
grass-green breast and purple 
legs and feet, need not; nor 
need the nicobar, 
novel, narrow-feathered dove. 
and one should see the papuan 
fancrests with six-sided scale which 
coats the foot; "not much is known about these splendid 
birds" hid in unimag- 
inably weak lead-colored ostrich- 
plumes a third of an inch long, and 
needle-fine cat-whisker-fibered battleship- 
gray lace. the samoan 
tooth-billed pigeon fortunately 
survives also— 
saved from destruction by no longer feeding on 
the ground, a bird with short legs 
and heavy bill, remarkable 
because related to the dodo. 
didus ineptus; man’s remorse 
enshrines it now, abundant still 
in sixteen-one. "a 
little bigger than our swans, these birds 
want wings and lay but one egg" the traveler 
said—"defenceless unsuspicious 
things, with a cry like the 
cry of a gosling." il 
dóudo (the words 
mean simple one)—extinct as 
the solitaires which having "raised 
their young one do not disunite." 
a new pigeon cannot compensate, but we have 
it. with neat-cered eye, long 
face, trim form and posture, this delight- 
ful bird outdoes the dashingly 
black and white dalmatian dog and map-freckled 
pony that indians dress 
with feathers seriatim down 
the mane and tail;— 
a slender cinderella deliberately 
pied, so she on each side is 
the same, an all-feather piebald, 
cuckoo-marked on a titanic scale 
taking perhaps sixteen birds to 
show the whole design, as in chess 
played with men and hors- 
es. yes, the thus medievally 
two-colored sea-pie-patterned semi-swan- 
necked magpie-pigeon, gamecock-legged 
with long-clawed toes, and all 
extremes—head neck back tail 
and feet—coal black, the 
rest snow white, has a surpris- 
ing modernness and fanciness 
and stateliness and…. yes indeed; 
developed by and humbly dedicated to 
the gentlemen of the 
feather club, this is a dainty breed. 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
i too, dislike it: there are things that are important beyond all this fiddle. 
reading it, however, with a perfect contempt for it, one discovers that there is in 
it after all, a place for the genuine. 
hands that can grasp, eyes 
that can dilate, hair that can rise 
if it must, these things are important not because a 
high sounding interpretation can be put upon them but because they are 
useful; when they become so derivative as to become unintelligible, 
the same thing may be said for all of us, that we 
do not admire what 
we cannot understand: the bat, 
holding on upside down or in quest of something to 
eat, elephants pushing, a wild horse taking a roll, a tireless wolf under 
a tree, the immovable critic twitching his skin like a horse that feels a flea, the base- 
ball fan, the statistician— 
nor is it valid 
to discriminate against "business documents and 
school-books"; all these phenomena are important. one must make a distinction 
however: when dragged into prominence by half poets, the result is not poetry, 
nor till the poets among us can be 
"literalists of 
the imagination"—above 
insolence and triviality and can present 
for inspection, imaginary gardens with real toads in them, shall we have 
it. in the meantime, if you demand on one hand, 
the raw material of poetry in 
all its rawness and 
that which is on the other hand 
genuine, then you are interested in poetry. 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
mouth open, she looked as though she was protesting 
her inclusion. i brought her to a place 
where no one speaks. there's been a mistake, 
she said with the soft folds 
of her tracksuit, the car keys 
she held like a set of brass knuckles. 
you can't take me anywhere i don't wish to go. 
i did have to drive out of town to take this picture. 
as evidence, it was the next day's news. 
now it's so obvious, her clavicle's hard line, 
the shadow there, a hollow big enough for two thumbs. 
the walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
moths, with brown wings the prize of 
asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
that peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
would come down from the morello cherry long after sunset; 
after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
for some caliph's odalisque 
or the low-stress oregonian monkey puzzles, 
a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
propose new kinds of orgasm. 
walking stick insects 
were squibs from the natural world, 
little stand-up comics 
fashioned after mutineered twigs. given half a chance, 
the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
wordsworth or nietzsche. like the wives of 17th century 
men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
dividing their time between joy and sloth. 
someone had left a mannequin in the street. 
it was wearing a wedding dress 
and—but no, 
it was a woman, standing on a box. 
a small crowd had gathered around her 
and her eyes were closed. 
i hesitated. then 
reached down to the jar at her feet 
as if i were bending to pet a stranger's dog. 
and as though i had deposited a soul, chink, 
her eyelids fluttered open, 
her fingers flickered, 
she awoke like hermione 
astonishing her husband 
in the miraculous final scene of the winter's tale. 
later, through the window of a restaurant, 
i saw her dash across a crowded street, 
clutching her skirts to keep them from the rain. 
bach’s solfegietto— 
harmonica and basso. 
the fish-spine 
on firs, on 
somber trees 
by the sea’s 
walls of wave-worn rock—have it; and 
a moonbow and bach’s cheerful firmness 
in a minor key. 
it’s an owl-and-a-pussy- 
both-content 
agreement. 
come, come. it’s 
mixed with wits; 
it’s not a graceful sadness. it’s 
resistance with bent head, like foxtail 
millet’s. brahms and bach, 
no; bach and brahms. to thank bach 
for his song 
first, is wrong. 
pardon me; 
both are the 
unintentional pansy-face 
uncursed by self-inspection; blackened 
because born that way. 
some speak of things we know, as new; 
and you, of things unknown as things forgot. 
a similar coral invades the apple, dyed 
inside as by infusion of the rind, 
or the poem that chanced to be prose, 
disclosing the signature in an interior 
mathematician’s parenthesis— 
astute device quite different from the autograph. 
somehow the accident of pleasure—a dedication qualitied 
indeed. it is at the opposite pole from the miser’s 
escutcheon, three vises hard-screwed; 
three padlocks clodhopping upon sensibility 
that devastating asset antipodal to pride, 
that would not for the world intrude 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
tapering 
to a point, conserving everything, 
this carrot is predestined to be thick. 
the world is 
but a circumstance, a mis- 
erable corn-patch for its feet. with ambition, imagination, outgrowth, 
nutriment, 
with everything crammed belligerent- 
ly inside itself, its fibers breed mon- 
opoly— 
a tail-like, wedge-shaped engine with the 
secret of expansion, fused with intensive heat to color of the set- 
ting sun and 
stiff. for the man in the straw hat, stand- 
ing still and turning to look back at it, 
as much as 
to say my happiest moment has 
been funereal in comparison with this, the conditions of life pre- 
determined 
slavery to be easy and freedom hard. for 
it? dismiss 
agrarian lore; it tells him this: 
that which it is impossible to force, it is impossible 
to hinder. 
the kitchen dark, the summer night air warm, 
and my father at the kitchen table, radio 
turned down low, alone, listening to baseball. 
my mother and i come inside from our swim, 
toweling off. the crowd is restless. long silences 
between pitches in the play-by-play. 
look how he holds the radio in both hands 
like a steering wheel, thumb on the tuning dial 
to catch the wavering channel, fighting static. 
his eyes glitter like a field of fireflies. 
it's the middle of the night. 
i've set the house on fire 
with those matches i love, 
the ones in the kitchen 
with the red bird on the box. 
you can strike them anywhere. 
allumettes qui s'allument partout. 
take care: may ignite if box is 
dropped, shaken, or crushed. 
this same bird flies through 
a tattoo on your arm. 
the house is burning down 
and i am thinking of boats. 
you hate the matches, the smell 
of bent, black spoons. 
i light one and it falls to the floor. 
another and another. take care. 
i don't know what to save 
from this place, sailing from wall 
to wall, room to room, smoking. 
you are not here. you are rain 
battering against some window. 
i don't know what to save. 
the red bird eats everything in sight. 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
"when i am dead," 
the wizard said, 
"i’ll look upon the narrow way 
and this dante, 
and know that he was right 
and he’ll delight 
in my remorse, 
of course." 
"when i am dead," 
the student said, 
"i shall have grown so tolerant, 
i’ll find i can’t 
laugh at your sorry plight 
or take delight 
in your chagrin, 
merlin." 
"we saw reindeer 
browsing," a friend who’d been in lapland, said: 
"finding their own food; they are adapted 
to scant reino 
or pasture, yet they can run eleven 
miles in fifty minutes; the feet spread when 
the snow is soft, 
and act as snow-shoes. they are rigorists 
however handsomely cutwork artists 
of lapland and 
siberia elaborate the trace 
or saddle-girth with saw-tooth leather lace. 
one looked at us 
with its firm face part brown, part white,—a queen 
of alpine flowers. santa claus’ reindeer, seen 
at last, had gray- 
brown fur, with a neck like edelweiss or 
lion’s foot,—leontopodium more 
exactly." and 
this candelabrum-headed ornament 
for a place where ornaments are scarce, sent 
to alaska, 
was a gift preventing the extinction 
of the esquimo. the battle was won 
by a quiet man, 
sheldon jackson, evangel to that race 
whose reprieve he read in the reindeer’s face. 
you do not seem to realise that beauty is a liability rather than 
an asset—that in view of the fact that spirit creates form we are justified in supposing 
that you must have brains. for you, a symbol of the unit, stiff and sharp, 
conscious of surpassing by dint of native superiority and liking for everything 
self-dependent, anything an 
ambitious civilization might produce: for you, unaided to attempt through sheer 
reserve, to confute presumptions resulting from observation, is idle. you cannot make us 
think you a delightful happen-so. but rose, if you are brilliant, it 
is not because your petals are the without-which-nothing of pre-eminence. you would, minus thorns, 
look like a what-is-this, a mere 
peculiarity. they are not proof against a worm, the elements, or mildew 
but what about the predatory hand? what is brilliance without co-ordination? guarding the 
infinitesimal pieces of your mind, compelling audience to 
the remark that it is better to be forgotten than to be remembered too violently, 
your thorns are the best part of you. 
would it not be the most 
prized gift that ever was! 
permitted to assist you, let me see … 
if those remembered by you 
are to think of you and not me, 
it seems to me that the memento 
or compliment you bestow 
should have a name beginning with "v," 
such as vera, el greco’s only 
daughter (though it has never been 
proved that he had one), her starchy 
veil, inside chiffon; the stone in her 
ring, like her eyes; one hand on 
her snow-leopard wrap, the fur widely 
dotted with black. it could be a vignette— 
a replica, framed oval— 
bordered by a vine or vinelet. 
or give a mere flower, said to mean the 
love of truth or truth of 
love—in other words, a violet. 
verse—unabashedly bold—is appropriate; 
and always it should be as neat 
as the most careful writer’s "8." 
any valentine that is written 
is as the vendange to the vine. 
might verse not best confuse itself with fate? 
with their respective lions— 
"mighty monoceroses with immeasured tayles"— 
these are those very animals 
described by the cartographers of 1539, 
defiantly revolving 
in such a way that the hard steel 
in the long keel of white exhibited in tumbling, 
disperses giant weeds 
and those sea snakes whose forms looped in the foam, "disquiet shippers." 
not ignorant of how a voyager obtained the horn of a sea unicorn 
to give queen elizabeth 
who thought it worth a hundred thousand pounds, 
they persevere in swimming where they like, 
finding the place where lions live in herds, 
strewn on the beach like stones with lesser stones— 
and bears are white; 
discovering antarctica, its penguin kings and icy spires, 
and sir john hawkins’ florida 
"abounding in land unicorns and lions, 
since where the one is, 
its arch enemy cannot be missing." 
thus personalities by nature much opposed, 
can be combined in such a way 
that when they do agree, their unanimity is great, 
"in politics, in trade, law, sport, religion, 
china collecting, tennis, and church going." 
you have remarked this fourfold combination of strange animals, 
upon embroideries, 
enwrought with "polished garlands" of agreeing indifference— 
thorns, "myrtle rods, and shafts of bay," 
"cobwebs, and knotts, and mulberries" 
of lapis lazuli and pomegranate and malachite— 
britannia’s sea unicorn with its rebellious child 
now ostentatiously indigenous of the new english coast 
and its land lion oddly tolerant of those pacific counterparts to it, 
the water lions of the west. 
this is a strange fraternity—these sea lions and land lions, 
land unicorns and sea unicorns: 
the lion civilly rampant, 
tame and concessive like the long-tailed bear of ecuador— 
the lion standing up against this screen of woven air 
which is the forest: 
the unicorn also, on its hind legs in reciprocity. 
a puzzle to the hunters, is this haughtiest of beasts, 
to be distinguished from those born without a horn, 
in use like saint jerome’s tame lion, as domestics, 
rebelling proudly at the dogs 
which are dismayed by the chain lightning 
playing at them from its horn— 
the dogs persistent in pursuit of it as if it could be caught, 
"deriving agreeable terror" from its "moonbeam throat" 
on fire like its white coat and unconsumed as if of salamander’s skin. 
so wary as to disappear for centuries and reappear, 
yet never to be caught, 
the unicorn has been preserved 
by an unmatched device 
wrought like the work of expert blacksmiths, 
with which nothing can compare— 
this animal of that one horn 
throwing itself upon which head foremost from a cliff, 
it walks away unharmed, 
proficient in this feat, which like herodotus, 
i have not seen except in pictures. 
thus this strange animal with its miraculous elusiveness, 
has come to be unique, 
"impossible to take alive," 
tamed only by a lady inoffensive like itself— 
as curiously wild and gentle; 
"as straight and slender as the crest, 
or antlet of the one-beam’d beast." 
upon the printed page, 
also by word of mouth, 
we have a record of it all 
and how, unfearful of deceit, 
etched like an equine monster on an old celestial map, 
beside a cloud or dress of virgin-mary blue, 
improved "all over slightly with snakes of venice gold, 
and silver, and some o’s," 
the unicorn "with pavon high," approaches eagerly; 
until engrossed by what appears of this strange enemy, 
upon the map, "upon her lap," 
its "mild wild head doth lie. 
and much fruit, the swan— 
one line of the mathematician’s 
sign greater-than, drawn 
to an apex where the lake is 
met by the weight on it; or an angel 
standing in the sun, how well 
armed, how manly; 
and promenading 
in sloughs of despond, a monster— 
man when human nothing 
more, grown to immaturity, 
punishing debtors, seeking his due—as 
an arrow turned inward has 
no chance of peace. 
this cloud is designed 
to move like a cursor from one side of the room to the other 
this cloud is designed to float inside 
uncorrupted by weather 
this cloud is easy to capture 
and won't last forever 
the cloud exists without a wonder 
of what anyone thinks     we study 
the cloud to learn this indifference     little deadpan filibuster 
the cloud makes a sudden diagonal 
move to the corner 
the crowd fills the space 
attempts to mimic its very nature 
as if one (just by watching) might gain 
a foothold 
knowing "the end" placard 
is mounted in the not-so- 
distant future 
there was no precedent 
just a headache, despair, three 
cans of asahi plastic-bagged and 
there they were: 
most punched into the earth like 
square stud earrings, 
the rest pushed out, erect, 
fake flowers at their base the most 
colourful pubic hair. 
one grave said lagos, nigeria so i stood 
by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
of my hand. 
i was the only live body around. 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
earworm 
mayor snow 
the walls 
through the restaurant window 
we bought a little city 
self-portrait 
not saying 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
poems: 
above picasso and his musings 
1. 
ineptitude's tidings 
ashore me, i'm sprawling stumble- 
drunk in seawrack 
and this grandiose spree of green 
beholds an odd bouquet. 
back at the old sandy blanket, our bodies 
mold mayhem; 
math majors enumerate games 
in the indivisible darkness. 
during a breather, we marvel at the midnight bay 
as it welters moseyingly 
under terminal city's distant subtractions. 
on higher ground, 
my bed has sprung a squeak. tempest- 
tossed, we let it squawk. 
2. 
at loftier 
elevations: picasso and his muses, 
an exhibit we visit 
on our friendship date. 
under a thrust of rain, 
we give up on appearances and sling warmth; 
a false-creeker 
shouts hubba-hubba. 
we shroud the light in a beach-blanket. 
this is more or less 
how it all came to pass. i have no secrets 
in my vending machine home. 
3. 
pablo diego josé francisco de paula juan 
nepomuceno maría de los remedios cipriano 
de la santísima trinidad ruiz y picasso, 
a baby soothered in saints. 
fernande olivier. orphan. pedastelled sixty times. 
pablo builds her a shrine. we stand 
close in front of the dancing 
olga khokhlova minutes. susurrations red-carpet 
marie-thérèse walter's allegorized 
lips. we almost touch by the dora 
maar moments under "a comfortable routine 
interrupted by world war two." 
we read ever so close, then glide 
by geneviève laporte who refuses to move 
in with her lover, which is what 
(she tells françoise gilot) 
"saves her skin." 
later, old pablo mistakes 
a parking meter in madrid 
for jacqueline roque's face. he paints 
the parking meter seventy times. 
4. 
on our second date 
you hold out a gift. i open 
a white piece of paper 
with more creases than a hundred 
hands. it's a map, 
you say. next, you make 
a compass from blue string. 
this will guide 
me through my beachcombing time 
collecting gribble-wrought scrimshaw 
for a sculpture i'm building to the annals 
of honesty hoarders. i'm part 
of many secret clubs. you 
shall know us by our bookshelves' 
blisteringly thin spines. 
i should have put 
that out-of-order sign on my cubist 
pile of a soul long ago. 
some coinage is stuck 
behind my five-dimensional eyes, 
but i want everything 
and you, your mind 
of galax, ivy, peruvian lily, pine, 
pussy willow, yellow rose, and other 
secret handshakes from flowers. 
you incite objects into a rube goldberg 
kabbalah, you're a radiance-chain 
of life-hacks, embroidery, and odyssean cunning. 
as i work out my zonked 
manufacturing to make way towards us 
at play. we genuflect 
in a ceremony of touching, go gung-ho 
into the amalgamating depths. 
after lorne 
the doughy older man in a marine bulldogs jacket 
signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
that's what it takes to get things done, he tells her 
and the rest of the waiting room.if nothing happens, 
you gotta investigate. that's what it means to be a marine. 
yes, lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit, 
her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
credo. yes, lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters 
wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths 
wide, lest we miss our last name/first initial flashed 
upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling. 
this room used to be a participatory democracy. 
now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
we read our patient education leaflets. we wait. 
outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city. 
anishnaabemowin 
this is what came before the world 
it was this 
that called the world 
into being 
so much older than what 
we speak now 
it has flowed through 
more of your ancestors 
than any other 
it has flowed within me 
even when i don't understand 
especially then 
i don't really know 
how you 
came into being 
it must have been this 
that called you 
bells 
stars originate from 
the same place as bells 
what should i be thinking about? 
apparently may 6th 
is world naked gardening day 
if a school were a uterus 
someone writes 
the politicians would protect 
the children inside 
a cupped hand 
a mouthful of water 
snowball the shape of a hand 
after 9/11 i remember writing 
something sarcastic 
intended to be zen 
a poem about not being able to find a sock 
i pissed off the poet 
george murray 
but i realize it's true 
anytime i've lost a sock 
someone's being shot 
even when i haven't lost one 
once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
to the lake 
tashlich: dropping bread into water 
casting off sins 
why am i doing this 
my son said don't believe in it 
what about making the world better? 
the rabbi asked 
yes my son said yes 
my son and i 
late autumn 
walking under the golden leaves 
on my desk 
a stapler, paperclips, some books 
laptop open to american news 
biscuit factory 
send my regards to the paris streets, the poet wrote * 
from exile in america. i will do the same to the room 
on alma, close to the eiffel tower, 
where i stayed with jeannie, from alaska, 
and her turkish friend, hanife. 
one room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
a toilet near the stair. while a man unlocked the door 
and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
into the foyer. the night of my 24thbirthday, 
the cards predicted disaster before i unfastened my handbag 
in the restaurant, to pay. someone had stolen my wallet 
and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
long distance for free. i lined up behind moroccans and turks, 
and phoned my mother at work where a kwakiutl sun 
blazed on the wall behind her. at lunchtime 
she went to the bank in her red high heels, 
and sent me money. why else am i here, 
but to wander until i remember 
the red brick ormand biscuit factory 
near where my father worked in victoria? 
thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
where condos now simper. my father climbed 
to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
to document gauges. we drove up in the chevy, 
to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted 
peter pan dress and stockings. he gave us treats— 
nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
and then my brother and i climbed up the side of the vats 
as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
and noticed us. you know, the condos there now, 
where the oil tanks were, 
and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage, 
are nothing to what happened to the girls 
i thought were my friends, and me. 
we lined up at dior in paris with the models, 
and went in. our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents. 
the breast for sappiness 
the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish 
conspiracy of love 
for those who are clean and sober 
the problem with trying to one-up yourself 
is not that you might die by your own hands, 
but that you'll be able to justify why 
without feeling anything. when you were 
in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt 
from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony 
to what you allowed: "i am satan, because i deal 
in language." the next day, you had stopped 
shaking, you went to work secular and clean. 
there were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
you know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts 
clicking together, lighting up your eyes. they are old 
technology made new, sleek and gleaming 
in crevasses like fog rolling around renfrew. 
you're awake today to see it, because you've been 
brave. you've noticed your friend has listened 
and told you very boring things—not dismissed 
them as errands. this is the task you will have to do, 
soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind 
moved—to write yourself into what you want 
to call conspiracy of love.when the guy from tinder 
said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you 
that he might know you from the internet. you didn't 
remember who he was, not even when he called you 
by your fake name. all you thought was, "i can't 
do this again. i want to be clean. i want to be shazia." 
if you end this poem here, it might make sense, 
but we both know this kind of work is occult. 
so, you have to ask me: how do you want to finish 
this poem? you have to leave it there. that way 
at least it's not about you anymore. 
cree dictionary 
the translation for joy 
in cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
the translation for bittersweet in cree 
looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
eight decades too late 
the translation for patience 
in cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children 
and two of her sister's 
the translation for evil 
in cree is the act of not calling 
your mother on a sunday 
the translation for expedition 
in cree is travelling 20 minutes 
to the only gas station in faust, alberta 
to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
the translation for success in cree 
is executing the perfect frog splash 
on your younger brother 
the cree word for white man is unpaid child support 
the translation for conflicted in cree 
is your deep, steadfast love 
for country superstar 
dwight yoakam (or depending on 
the regional dialect, 
george jones, patsy cline 
or blue rodeo) 
the cree word for constellation 
is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
the translation for policeman 
in cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
the translation for genius 
in cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep 
the cree word for poetry is your four-year-old 
niece's cracked lips spilling out 
broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between 
the gaps in her teeth 
crystals 
b clicks fistfuls of amethysts. b is six. earlier this week, 
in an agassiz campground, she held a tiny 
abandoned rabbit. watership down, 
but with ravers, 
fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, edm 
and bike lights, b's mother gripping 
capsules stuffed 
with crystals 
in her fist. i tell my mother i never want kids. my mother teaches 
motherhood in ontario woods, leads la leche league, 
squirrels worn-out clothes 
for quilts to send 
overseas. my blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy. 
these years as b's nanny, her nature scraping 
against my nurture. 
her mother 
couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected 
t cells, says she sometimes senses this 
distance. what bits of 
my mother 
insist in me? to what do i affix our distance? the burr thicket of it, 
sticky. the body's crystal arithmetic. b gives me 
an amethyst, tells me how 
the rabbit's heart 
beat beneath her fingertips. 
cxxvii 
i'm staring at shakespeare's poem. blocked. carnage because black was not counted fairly. torn into faithless weather because literature assured black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. the critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. informed since i could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of english, i've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of english thinking. the foreign anguish, language! with art's facelessness i borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. shame on who? shame on who? i'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. sometimes you see yourself profaned. sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? somebody doesn't. this situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if i don't bring work home. i'm churning through shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. my children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. they are with me always, as i fail at ease. they don't exist, as i cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard. 
diiiiiiiiid iiiiitttt happen 
the stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. you fill out index cards. press buttons. feel buoyed by laughter and attention. 
a question goes up on the board. you're in it to win it. you're not here to make friends. "what is—the reason she says she drinks." (yay, points!) 
"what is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
(points!)(points!)(points!) 
mom says, "i'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
she sweeps the board. (applause! cries!) 
it doesn't matter. you're pretty sure you're ahead. 
you're in the bonus round. you take turns. one person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. the audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming. 
doing the death we call pretty 
i could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
doing the death we call pretty. instead, i lord 
a little over people parking, coming & goingremark silent 
on body language—what gait is revealing— 
while i wait by the printer for a report 
i don't even need. the chore, it let me remember 
the world, free & flowing. on the hospital elevator 
this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman 
w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children. 
a young, halfway-pregnant couple. a womanmy mother's shape 
in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic. 
a surgeon'scrocs streaked w/purple-brown blood. 
jackson pollock.in the caf, a man tosses fries 
into his mouth for breakfast,his entire head & eyes 
bandaged up, white & soft as a q-tip. vision 
is my drug. i can't tell if it's working, b/c how 
did my life become a sequence of how do i kill 
the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
when is someone going to finally turnto me & say, 
all this time,what have you been doing? 
it will be an accusation, & a mercy. 
don 
don coles died today. today, katie, 
a student i taught, published her first 
book. i think of my teacher, mike, who don 
taught, and i think of all the lessons that 
don must have taught me through mike, all 
mike taught katie through me. i think of 
the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
cupped hands passing this water, without 
breaks, into another cupped pair. i'm amazed 
at how much we can drink and still have more 
to share. i think of all i learned from katie 
just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
the first poem in her first book, and i am 
amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
rush back through me to mike to don, 
another tributary in this miracle river 
that flows in both directions at once. it dawns 
on me how amazing it is that i can be a river 
at the same time that i'm a man underground, 
breaking down on a train, at the same time 
that i'm a ceaseless pen, that i'm blurred words 
clarified through tears, that i'm ink that dreams  it's 
elgin county 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
flattering 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
fuji, baby 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
how soon, how likely, how severe 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
kill poem 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
letter to atleo from the old shell station near buckhorn 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
the lipstick effect 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
marketplace 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
my mother gave me 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
nancy creek: end of summer 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
o sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
ode to the cockroach 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
transition 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
tu me manques 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
under construction 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
union station 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
witch hunt 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 
racter poems 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
uninhabited 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
injun 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
omnivore 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
on day and night (james arthur) 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
the sympathy of angels 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
a local history 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
love is a moontime teaching 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
mornings with the one glove 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
feel happier in nine seconds 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
water glass 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
african evening 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
homecoming 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
happiness is not the only happiness 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
ideal world 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
if you see it what is it you see 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
the myth of orpheus 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
the meaning of life 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
the ship 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
part of the main 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
iain lachlan campbell 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
et in arcadia ego 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
the fifth season 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
funny 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
victoria soto 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
harvest moon lantern festival 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
pastorals in the atrium 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
self storage 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
repose 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
pender and hamilton 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
little voice 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
amygdala 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
anniversary 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
there must be a name for this 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
terra nova, terraformed 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
look book 
over there on the green 
lawn under a sick pine 
is the body of the bird 
his plumage blue when 
i go to look at him and 
wonder if he's dead but 
his chest sort of heaves 
so i bend down closer 
look how the breast 
of the bird splits open 
and a fist of maggots 
spills out on the grass 
a necklace of sticky 
pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
and shining in the july 
light invertebrates that 
form an anecdote before 
i go back into our clapboard 
house to look at the sears 
catalogue and dream 
i am a girl posed into 
happiness look at me 
here now in this new 
dress i've bought with my 
own money at age twenty 
in the city when the cops 
question me i flash my 
passport thinking of 
lichen inching down 
a branch of a tree over 
the town river when i was 
small and somewhere my 
birth father is drunk and 
homeless, half-mad when 
the cops ask for his name 
he'll say, december 
beauty 
beauty is my irreparable and today i became geometric. 
a faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of first principles. 
in a whiteout of atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
vein of euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
surrounded me. i genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father's jaundice, for i am a good daughter of the colony. 
the colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
i should service or else receive a lesser dessert. with my smudge 
cleanse at the ready i find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
to time, or i'm out of it, entirely. chanting hell as hair veils 
my face as if this is a western. come polygon and i circumvent 
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. holy i went, holy 
all around my head, the holy i am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. striated by the pinnacle 
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
of its gravity. you can scan the ground from overhead for death 
pits. i read this on the internet when i was dehydrated, lonely, 
and afraid. office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition's patent heart. i've gone and been abominable. 
a column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
at the edges of my system an anishinabek or indo-european 
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
space of animal magnetism. white pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. oh, inconsequent curb 
of my street i refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
charged with trafficking. still waiting to be ordained, i make 
mask of our features that are retreating. plush pockets of rust 
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. i've gone 
and got a blister. that summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
porch. a half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. so i continue 
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where i am only just alive. 
bozo, today is over. 
a wake 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
i've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
your eyes open the night's slow static. at a loss 
to understand all that i cannot say, as if you came 
upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
if i moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
will return to me what i lost learning to speak. 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
as long as you hold me i am doubled from without and within: 
a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
i will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once i see 
your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
broken on a shore of cedar. we twist in a wake of fog. 
self-portrait cemetery 
there was no precedent 
just a headache, despair, three 
cans of asahi plastic-bagged and 
there they were: 
most punched into the earth like 
square stud earrings, 
the rest pushed out, erect, 
fake flowers at their base the most 
colourful pubic hair. 
one grave said lagos, nigeria so i stood 
by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
of my hand. 
i was the only live body around. 
they moved my friends 
into the chicken coop. 
and where are the chickens? 
i wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
and i wished for the donkeys— 
i wished something very large for the donkeys. 
i am a donkey. 
there was ginger ale, coke zero, 
and mexican beer 
on the small cart of the small donkey. 
the large and 
heavy head of a 
donkey 
covered in several burlap sacks. 
nausicaa 
she remembers only her dreaming. refashions herself 
in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
changed and replaced it before she woke. i, too, am at 
her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
part of the dream. she cannot see me lying waterlogged 
on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
walks by. it doesn't matter what i am. there is a certain 
pleasure in that. 
killarnoe 
killarnoe is a place i invented right 
now. i just built it from my head. i started 
with a letter k and set down the letters 
that spilled out. what does that say when k-i-l-l 
first sprouts? something repressed, or 
an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
free reign, opens to its own mind 
and speaks bluntly? but see how i persisted 
past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
and a silent e watching without judgement. 
killarnoe, i decide, is the land 
of our ancient people. 
ah 
an open moment, 
a prolonging 
of notice 
without reaction, a downward 
fountain of data, filling. 
unclosing, throat's 
wholeness, wide, 
to swallow 
the thrall of all of it: 
full bulge of gulp 
held— 
nothing undulating, no 
void vacuum 
pursuing a present cud 
through 
a human tunnel. 
sustained hum, 
sustenance 
pouring, not pulsing. 
rinse without erosion, 
flush without the closed 
push of peristalsis. 
clarity 
not needing blur 
to know itself. 
armadillo 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
i am in love with your brother 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
the masturbating flowers 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
the pinata 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
the internet 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
foley artist 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
voodoo hypothesis 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
keepers of paradise 
this is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
this is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
the river that runs from eden mouth 
to rare unsweetened mouth. 
i've logged the sour dawns of all 
my quiet into this body, 
its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
and reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
in the morse events of smallest things 
in my new metropolis away. 
i am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
call me isobar. distraction in place of earth. 
call me tropical depression 
where i regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
i'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
but enough. hear morne d'or divinize her song. 
give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom. 
don draper 
moths feather your far gazebo 
like young sailors on first leave. 
you know something, and keep reminding me 
of my own needs. you see an audience 
of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
and act accordingly. the swallows see it at five o'clock, 
a wolfman's tragedy. 
they hang themselves upside down, 
handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
swayed by a summer night, i swing out 
to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
a bird about-face. you're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 
poseurs 
the walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
moths, with brown wings the prize of 
asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
that peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
would come down from the morello cherry long after sunset; 
after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
for some caliph's odalisque 
or the low-stress oregonian monkey puzzles, 
a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
propose new kinds of orgasm. 
walking stick insects 
were squibs from the natural world, 
little stand-up comics 
fashioned after mutineered twigs. given half a chance, 
the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
wordsworth or nietzsche. like the wives of 17th century 
men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
dividing their time between joy and sloth. 
stranger 
a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
in their party dresses, all yelling, "don't run! don't run!" 
laughing and looking like they were having 
the time of their lives. i noticed one girl 
near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
for no other reason than itself. lost now too, 
sitting in 14b in pashmina and dark glasses, 
i might as well be the smyrna merchant. 
i've never been good at small talk; 
besides which, we'll be in new york in about an hour. 
later that night, i remembered the way she laughed 
as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
was the first thing i saw when i woke. it seems now 
she'd shown me what had come to me once 
and was now gone. travelling from montréal over a month ago, 
i can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
they didn't admit the syrian poet scheduled 
to lecture at nyu two days before. i small-talked 
the homeland security officer about his upcoming trip 
to guelph, ontario, where his wife's from. 
love, another poet once claimed, 
could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
what's been lost, and what i understood was 
that the vase, if put back together, 
becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
we might lose again, and so we do. 
i don't stick to the facts— 
what if i wrote lines that took nothing 
but the shape of my thoughts? 
no irritable reaching for an old story, 
no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
a rail bridge connects the old playground 
to the abandoned car lot—i say that knowing 
i don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
is that poetic license? it's not something i need to know, 
this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
the sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the hudson. 
they call it stranger's weather. 
i rather think i did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
i asked too—not about a better view; 
about someone entirely different, about what remains 
after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel. 
appetites 
you wake hearing the girl next door come in at two a.m. 
in the event that it's a ghost, it's telling you 
not to waste time in bed 
worrying. 
you should be sleeping, or doing 
anything else. 
you haven't yet seen the faun, the red fox, 
or the rabbit. 
the statue of a woman in the lily-padded lake is waist-deep, 
a mimicry of diana's animal life, suspicious of sleep. 
with her in mind, you're troubled even thinking of things 
that don't frighten you. 
but this, too, is a waste of time and talent. 
there is good slumber 
to be sought in the rush of ruminations outside yourself: 
in listlessness of reeds on the dead embankment, 
in languor of bee by a late marigold 
or duck feathers gathering in a corner of falling 
water. 
you realize you haven't organized your life. 
you've forgotten yourself entirely. 
you wake up and try to pick up the thread. 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
mouth open, she looked as though she was protesting 
her inclusion. i brought her to a place 
where no one speaks. there's been a mistake, 
she said with the soft folds 
of her tracksuit, the car keys 
she held like a set of brass knuckles. 
you can't take me anywhere i don't wish to go. 
i did have to drive out of town to take this picture. 
as evidence, it was the next day's news. 
now it's so obvious, her clavicle's hard line, 
the shadow there, a hollow big enough for two thumbs. 
skipping stones 
i fling flat stones into the surf, corral 
my anger in the strangely angled pose. 
each beat's concentric blip a sound so odd 
it clarifies the brine to mellow blues. 
my mother's ex once skimmed his bottle caps 
down at the lake; not littering, i thought, 
the glinting disc's fourteen discrete hop-hops. 
now i trust black, the solid strength of rock. 
my hand must learn the pebble's weight, and know 
which chips will change the shape and spoil the trick; 
this can't be accurately guessed, and though 
some seem to work without my gauging it; 
i fling them to new ocean bottom homes, 
and some i leave to dry upon the beach. skip stones. 
party music 
in '68 a great conductor came 
to one small european town. his flat 
was right above our gran's. he reeked of fame, 
wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
a coat in astrakhan. a man like that 
deserved the name of meister. appetite 
for drama and excitement won at last; 
we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
the aura of an enigmatic past 
(unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
of swissness. we could only speculate; 
he was a mighty river with no source. 
but we had watched him leave the building late: 
a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
had scooped him up, a russian at his side. 
an undernourished blonde in mink. of course. 
what more could any human being provide? 
we had it figured out. we knew this man 
was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
salvation for the suffering of gran, 
whose patience was as solid as the stones 
on via maestra. so we made a plan, 
imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
notified (a buzz between two phones), 
down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
although our minds had not digested sex, 
we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
he'd ring the bell, come in for tea. the next 
instalment of our hot imaginings: 
her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
(insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
his man-purse chucked aside! like mighty wings 
those sideburns swooped on in. oh, great abyss 
she toppled into, blown by some gust 
of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
all this for romance in the upper crust, 
a man above domestic life's dull take, 
a mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
party member, the phrase of cold 
and adult truth was just one part left out 
of what the two of us were later told. 
it wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
for party used to mean the happy mess, 
the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
but now we heard the coda of distress: 
the rattle of a door against a chair, 
the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
no nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
the strains of the horst wessel lied instead. 
because, of course, the party wasn't ours. 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
they all had names like jennifer or lynne 
or katherine; they all had bone-blonde hair, 
that wet, flat cut with bangs. they pulled your chair 
from underneath you, shoved their small fists in 
your face. too soon, you knew it would begin, 
those minkish teeth like shrapnel in the air, 
the bacchic taunts, the herculean dare, 
their soccer cleats against your porcine shin, 
that laugh, which sounded like a hundred birds 
escaping from a gunshot through the reeds— 
and now you have to face it all again: 
the joyful freckled faces lost for words 
in supermarkets, as those red hands squeeze 
your own. it's been so long! they say. amen. 
radio 
the kitchen dark, the summer night air warm, 
and my father at the kitchen table, radio 
turned down low, alone, listening to baseball. 
my mother and i come inside from our swim, 
toweling off. the crowd is restless. long silences 
between pitches in the play-by-play. 
look how he holds the radio in both hands 
like a steering wheel, thumb on the tuning dial 
to catch the wavering channel, fighting static. 
his eyes glitter like a field of fireflies. 
prague 
someone had left a mannequin in the street. 
it was wearing a wedding dress 
and—but no, 
it was a woman, standing on a box. 
a small crowd had gathered around her 
and her eyes were closed. 
i hesitated. then 
reached down to the jar at her feet 
as if i were bending to pet a stranger's dog. 
and as though i had deposited a soul, chink, 
her eyelids fluttered open, 
her fingers flickered, 
she awoke like hermione 
astonishing her husband 
in the miraculous final scene of the winter's tale. 
later, through the window of a restaurant, 
i saw her dash across a crowded street, 
clutching her skirts to keep them from the rain. 
redbird 
it's the middle of the night. 
i've set the house on fire 
with those matches i love, 
the ones in the kitchen 
with the red bird on the box. 
you can strike them anywhere. 
allumettes qui s'allument partout. 
take care: may ignite if box is 
dropped, shaken, or crushed. 
this same bird flies through 
a tattoo on your arm. 
the house is burning down 
and i am thinking of boats. 
you hate the matches, the smell 
of bent, black spoons. 
i light one and it falls to the floor. 
another and another. take care. 
i don't know what to save 
from this place, sailing from wall 
to wall, room to room, smoking. 
you are not here. you are rain 
battering against some window. 
i don't know what to save. 
the red bird eats everything in sight. 
snake handler 
no tricks, 
i just love them 
as my own blood 
and keep my eyes 
on the ceiling. 
o brothers, i sing, 
your bodies are thick 
as wrists, your skins 
my only book. 
i relieve them 
of poison, 
i undo what they do. 
i'm charcoal and paper. 
touch me: i leave 
a mark on your hand. 
this is just costume, 
my depression dress, 
my buckled shoe. 
tin flowers in my ears 
play spiral-groove blues. 
song of the last shaker 
one line, 
two line, 
three line, 
plane. 
i skate across the lake on a bone-made blade. 
my spine is an arrow, a leg of his chair. 
my nose straight and narrow and long 
as my hair. 
my body's for bruising. 
my heart is her sky. 
i train my breath 
upwards. 
i practice. 
i die. 
the trouble with wormholes 
how many times must i learn the lesson of compression? 
let go of everything you know and start from scratch. 
one friend performing backbends on a beach while another 
snaps his tibia on an icy patch of saskatchewan. i don't think 
i'm suffering, my days a series of unexpected gifts punctuated 
by a blast of the family rage shot deep into my soft plexus. 
it occurs to me i don't have to be so many people. if you're staying 
alive spinning stories, it's suddenly a skill that you talk too much. 
i'm not sure it's smart to unlock the portal. the reformed raver 
claimed he saw my inner wheels spin. red cloud, are there wars 
where you are? your great-great-grandson appeared on democracy 
now! with a plan. will my generation be remembered for anything 
i haven't forgotten? they mine the hills for gold, they mine the hills 
for uranium, and all around the world, columns are cracking. 
i've watched you soar all day. please teach me how you do that. 
good day villanelle 
you ran naked out the door. 
the neighbours laughed; i chased you down. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i know you're busy. 
did i tell you when you were little how 
you ran naked out the door? 
you got halfway down the street 
before i caught you in my arms. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i think i told you this before: 
i was giving you a bath and then 
you ran naked out the door. 
it happened fast. 
the neighbours laughed. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
you have to watch a baby close. 
i remember once— 
you ran naked out the door. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
i do not think that i could love a human being; i would not 
know it if i squeezed too hard. i would be a great bear. i would 
go rumbling through. 
i would try to eat you. i would stand alone, 
in the quiet centre of you, and roar. no, i 
could not love you. i could not 
love a human being. 
i would get so 
stuck on things. the small 
flaws in you, like 
the way that you will die; 
it would stick in my throat, i could not love you. 
and the way that, if you touched me, i would be 
as if to you a solid object, 
as if a boot, a stick, a stone. 
and you to me. the way that i could 
pick you up. that i could 
hammer you against me; that i could 
bruise myself on you, and still have only a 
brief impression of you left there on my skin. 
and, if i cried, that too would be 
an imitation of the thing that i would feel. 
and the pain itself, if it were real, would come as if 
so separately from you that it might 
equally have been a whip, a rope, 
a rail with which i thrashed myself when i 
thrashed myself with you. 
no, i could not love a human being if they 
could not leave a mark. 
even if i were a bear 
and i ate you, you would 
move right through me. 
even if you were a bear 
and you ate me, i would 
move right through you. 
but i am not a bear. and will not eat you. 
if i said i could, i could not. 
and you are not a bear. and will not eat me. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
materials 
growing up, i 
did not have books 
the only reading material 
there was 
were old newspapers laid out 
on the floor 
to dry 
our winter boots 
or wrap 
things of glass 
when i learned to read, 
the winter boots 
lay dripping 
in the hallway; 
the glass, broken 
and uncovered 
because i knew this 
this 
would be my way in 
at the farm 
i was sitting in the car counting the black flies 
they had come in through the open window 
there were four 
one was on the rear-view mirror 
the other three were perched on my left hand 
i heard a gunshot by the barn and thought nothing of it 
we were at a farm 
i saw a cow come charging forward with its head half gone 
a man with an axe came running behind it 
he hit it once 
once he hit it 
and it fell to the ground 
everything was eaten 
its eye appeared in a soup that night 
everything accounted for 
bare 
it means you are light, that you can begin differently now, that you've taken it 
all off 
it means to show your tooth and claw, without the work, the polish, the 
appointment 
if the ending were different, if you placed the last letter right after the 
beginning, it would be an animal, a power, a warning from which to stay away 
face to face, maybe you'd see they're really not all that different, both just 
trying 
a rearrangement, a shift, a move out of place, a spine realigned 
but it would take that wouldn't it? that face to face, to know 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
i should have propped something else beside it— 
an empty can, or the last half of my sandwich. 
as it stands, the cricket's size grows in the telling, 
spreads like the news, years ago, of abandoned stacks 
of dirty magazines stowed at the creek behind 
the street where i grew up. when my bicycle tires 
edged over the lip, boys were already clutching the rain- 
soaked pages in their fists, the ink of my first 
glimpses of flesh were already starting to pale, 
to bleed into the leaves. seriously, we'd say 
in the schoolyard, it was the coolest. later, actual 
clothing would melt off actual flesh; yes, melt, 
not just fall to the floor, because, seriously, she 
was the hottest. then gossip flares up in the yard's 
kindled corners. when she finally calls up, crying, 
i don't relay how her how could yous clutched 
at my throat, pinned me to the receiver, silent, ashamed, 
because i knew i'd been the worst. 
then what? i left, took a few bum jobs 
humping rich peoples' luggage, spent two years 
in seoul, korea, navigating through crowds 
where, for the first time, i was the tallest, 
so i stuck out to this gorgeous backpacker 
who speaks fluent italian, recites whole blocks 
of the inferno aloud, and moved in with her 
as soon as i came home, because, seriously, 
it felt like the real thing. though i'm no longer sure 
"real" is the right word, because it's years on, 
and i'm no longer sure of this house, or this town, 
or my job, and with her, lately, well let's just say 
this stretch has been tough. so i stuff the last three 
cans of a six-pack, a camera, and a sandwich 
into a knapsack, set out to hike along a creek 
where leaves brushing against my bare forearms 
still feel erotic. rambling, i turn this corner to find 
there, on a bare patch of dirt, the world's biggest cricket, 
this freakishly massive thing, and clutch at my mouth 
as the air fills with the orchestral swell of its legs, 
and gather myself enough to snap a single photo 
before it leaps so high i think it must be heading 
into someone else's life. shit, i whisper further on, 
realizing my shot on the bare patch will show nothing 
of its largeness. hear myself having to try to explain, 
struggling, because it was amazing, and, seriously, 
i've never been able to help myself. one way or another, 
i will have to try to tell her every single thing. 
earworm 
so there's likely a more accurate name 
for the glow of a deer's eyes in the dark. 
for the hunger that drew a python in florida 
to swallow an alligator whole. for the aura, 
the swell just before the gut burst. 
for why you've been staying up late at night 
on a search engine, looking for all of the possible 
names for a lump at the back of your nostril. 
for the name of that girl who sold you a pill 
from the basket of her bike, and rode off while 
her fairy wings flapped in the breeze. and a name 
for that breeze. repetune, ohrwurm, 
the last song stuck in your head 
which became something else. and for what else? 
for not being able to say the one thing 
that might have kept you from continually falling apart. 
for discovering late. for replaying the video clip 
of joltin' joe carter's ninth-inning blast 
in the '93 series. for the sound when the ball 
hit the bat, and everyone knew they'd won 
before it left the park. and for the white noise 
that isn't white noise, but a poor translation of what 
the blood tries to say. and what the blood tries to say. 
for the feeling of never wanting to leave the party 
and then having to leave. for the ache in your legs 
when you should have cabbed home, but decided to walk 
and the walk was too far. but you had to keep on— 
my father used to say, 
"superior people never make long visits, 
have to be shown longfellow’s grave 
nor the glass flowers at harvard. 
self reliant like the cat— 
that takes its prey to privacy, 
the mouse’s limp tail hanging like a shoelace from its mouth— 
they sometimes enjoy solitude, 
and can be robbed of speech 
by speech which has delighted them. 
the deepest feeling always shows itself in silence; 
not in silence, but restraint." 
nor was he insincere in saying, "‘make my house your inn.’" 
inns are not residences. 
i fling flat stones into the surf, corral 
my anger in the strangely angled pose. 
each beat's concentric blip a sound so odd 
it clarifies the brine to mellow blues. 
my mother's ex once skimmed his bottle caps 
down at the lake; not littering, i thought, 
the glinting disc's fourteen discrete hop-hops. 
now i trust black, the solid strength of rock. 
my hand must learn the pebble's weight, and know 
which chips will change the shape and spoil the trick; 
this can't be accurately guessed, and though 
some seem to work without my gauging it; 
i fling them to new ocean bottom homes, 
and some i leave to dry upon the beach. skip stones. 
a brass-green bird with grass- 
green throat smooth as a nut, springs from 
twig to twig askew, copying the 
chinese flower piece—businesslike atom 
in the stiff-leafed tree’s blue- 
pink, dregs-of-wine, pyramids 
of mathematic 
circularity—one of a 
pair. a redbird with a hatchet 
crest lights straight, on a twig 
between the two, bending the 
peculiar 
bouquet down; and there are 
several black antique 
bootjack fireflies touched with weak bright 
hunting-pink. "the legendary white- 
eared black bulbul that sings 
only in pure sanskrit" should 
be here—"tame clever 
true nightingale." the cardinal- 
bird that is usually a 
pair looks somewhat odd, like 
"the ambassadorial 
inverness 
worn by one who dresses 
in new york but dreams of 
london." it was artifice saw 
on a patch-box pigeon-egg, room for 
fervent script, and wrote as with a bird’s claw 
under the pair on the 
hyacinth-blue lid—"joined in 
friendship, crowned by love." 
an aspect may deceive; as the 
elephant’s columbine-tubed trunk 
held waveringly out— 
an at will heavy thing—is 
delicate. 
art is unfortunate. 
one may be a blameless 
bachelor and it is but a 
step to congreve. a rosalindless 
redbird comes where people are, knowing they 
have not made a point of 
being where he is—this bird 
which says not sings, "without 
loneliness i should be more 
lonely, so i keep it"—half in 
japanese. and what of 
our clasped hands that swear "by peace 
plenty; as 
by wisdom peace." alas! 
no tricks, 
i just love them 
as my own blood 
and keep my eyes 
on the ceiling. 
o brothers, i sing, 
your bodies are thick 
as wrists, your skins 
my only book. 
i relieve them 
of poison, 
i undo what they do. 
i'm charcoal and paper. 
touch me: i leave 
a mark on your hand. 
this is just costume, 
my depression dress, 
my buckled shoe. 
tin flowers in my ears 
play spiral-groove blues. 
i have a friend who would give a price for those long fingers all of one length— 
those hideous bird’s claws, for that exotic asp and the mongoose— 
products of the country in which everything is hard work, the country of the grass-getter, 
the torch-bearer, the dog-servant, the message-bearer, the holy-man. 
engrossed in this distinguished worm nearly as wild and as fierce as the day it was captured, 
he gazes as if incapable of looking at anything with a view to analysis. 
"the slight snake rippling quickly through the grass, 
the leisurely tortoise with its pied back, 
the chameleon passing from twig to stone, from stone to straw," 
lit his imagination at one time; his admiration now converges upon this: 
thick, not heavy, it stands up from its traveling-basket, 
the essentially greek, the plastic animal, all of a piece from nose to tail; 
one is compelled to look at it as at the shadows of the alps 
imprisoning in their folds like flies in amber, the rhythms of the skating-rink. 
this animal to which from the earliest times, importance has attached, 
fine as its worshippers have said—for what was it invented? 
to show that when intelligence in its pure form 
has embarked on a train of thought which is unproductive, it will come back? 
we do not know; the only positive thing about it is its shape, but why protest? 
the passion for setting people right is in itself an afflictive disease. 
distaste which takes no credit to itself is best. 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
trying to open locked doors with a sword, threading 
the points of needles, planting shade trees upside down; swallowed by the opaqueness of one whom the seas 
love better than they love you, ireland— 
you have lived and lived on every kind of shortage. 
you have been compelled by hags to spin gold thread from straw and have heard men 
say: "there is a feminine 
temperament in direct contrast to 
ours which makes her do these things. circumscribed by a 
heritage of blindness and native incompetence, she will become wise and will be forced to give 
in. compelled by experience, she 
will turn back; water seeks its own level": and you 
have smiled. "water in motion is far 
from level." you have seen it when obstacles happened to bar 
the path—rise automatically. 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
in their party dresses, all yelling, "don't run! don't run!" 
laughing and looking like they were having 
the time of their lives. i noticed one girl 
near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
for no other reason than itself. lost now too, 
sitting in 14b in pashmina and dark glasses, 
i might as well be the smyrna merchant. 
i've never been good at small talk; 
besides which, we'll be in new york in about an hour. 
later that night, i remembered the way she laughed 
as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
was the first thing i saw when i woke. it seems now 
she'd shown me what had come to me once 
and was now gone. travelling from montréal over a month ago, 
i can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
they didn't admit the syrian poet scheduled 
to lecture at nyu two days before. i small-talked 
the homeland security officer about his upcoming trip 
to guelph, ontario, where his wife's from. 
love, another poet once claimed, 
could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
what's been lost, and what i understood was 
that the vase, if put back together, 
becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
we might lose again, and so we do. 
i don't stick to the facts— 
what if i wrote lines that took nothing 
but the shape of my thoughts? 
no irritable reaching for an old story, 
no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
a rail bridge connects the old playground 
to the abandoned car lot—i say that knowing 
i don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
is that poetic license? it's not something i need to know, 
this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
the sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the hudson. 
they call it stranger's weather. 
i rather think i did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
i asked too—not about a better view; 
about someone entirely different, about what remains 
after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
transition 
tu me manques 
under construction 
union station 
witch hunt 
racter poems 
uninhabited 
injun 
omnivore 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on day and night 
the sympathy of angels 
a local history 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
love is a moontime teaching 
mornings with the one glove 
feel happier in nine seconds 
water glass 
african evening 
homecoming 
happiness is not the only happiness 
ideal world 
if you see it what is it you see 
the myth of orpheus 
the meaning of life 
the ship 
part of the main 
iain lachlan campbell 
et in arcadia ego 
the fifth season 
funny 
victoria soto 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
harvest moon lantern festival 
pastorals in the atrium 
yes, 
windstorm 
regeneration machine 
by way of explanation 
the goodnight skirt 
self storage 
repose 
pender and hamilton 
little voice 
amygdala 
anniversary 
there must be a name for this 
terra nova, terraformed 
look book 
euro—anishinaabekwe—noli turbare 
a wake 
self-portrait cemetery 
they moved my friends 
nausicaa 
killarnoe 
ah 
armadillo 
i am in love with your brother 
the masturbating flowers 
the pinata 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the internet 
foley artist 
voodoo hypothesis 
keepers of paradise 
don draper 
poseurs 
stranger 
appetites 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
skipping stones 
party music 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
radio 
prague 
redbird 
snake handler 
song of the last shaker 
the trouble with wormholes 
good day villanelle 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
materials 
at the farm 
bare 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
earworm 
mayor snow 
the walls 
through the restaurant window 
we bought a little city 
self-portrait 
not saying 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
poems: 
above picasso and his musings 
1. 
ineptitude's tidings 
ashore me, i'm sprawling stumble- 
drunk in seawrack 
and this grandiose spree of green 
beholds an odd bouquet. 
back at the old sandy blanket, our bodies 
mold mayhem; 
math majors enumerate games 
in the indivisible darkness. 
during a breather, we marvel at the midnight bay 
as it welters moseyingly 
under terminal city's distant subtractions. 
on higher ground, 
my bed has sprung a squeak. tempest- 
tossed, we let it squawk. 
2. 
at loftier 
elevations: picasso and his muses, 
an exhibit we visit 
on our friendship date. 
under a thrust of rain, 
we give up on appearances and sling warmth; 
a false-creeker 
shouts hubba-hubba. 
we shroud the light in a beach-blanket. 
this is more or less 
how it all came to pass. i have no secrets 
in my vending machine home. 
3. 
pablo diego josé francisco de paula juan 
nepomuceno maría de los remedios cipriano 
de la santísima trinidad ruiz y picasso, 
a baby soothered in saints. 
fernande olivier. orphan. pedastelled sixty times. 
pablo builds her a shrine. we stand 
close in front of the dancing 
olga khokhlova minutes. susurrations red-carpet 
marie-thérèse walter's allegorized 
lips. we almost touch by the dora 
maar moments under "a comfortable routine 
interrupted by world war two." 
we read ever so close, then glide 
by geneviève laporte who refuses to move 
in with her lover, which is what 
(she tells françoise gilot) 
"saves her skin." 
later, old pablo mistakes 
a parking meter in madrid 
for jacqueline roque's face. he paints 
the parking meter seventy times. 
4. 
on our second date 
you hold out a gift. i open 
a white piece of paper 
with more creases than a hundred 
hands. it's a map, 
you say. next, you make 
a compass from blue string. 
this will guide 
me through my beachcombing time 
collecting gribble-wrought scrimshaw 
for a sculpture i'm building to the annals 
of honesty hoarders. i'm part 
of many secret clubs. you 
shall know us by our bookshelves' 
blisteringly thin spines. 
i should have put 
that out-of-order sign on my cubist 
pile of a soul long ago. 
some coinage is stuck 
behind my five-dimensional eyes, 
but i want everything 
and you, your mind 
of galax, ivy, peruvian lily, pine, 
pussy willow, yellow rose, and other 
secret handshakes from flowers. 
you incite objects into a rube goldberg 
kabbalah, you're a radiance-chain 
of life-hacks, embroidery, and odyssean cunning. 
as i work out my zonked 
manufacturing to make way towards us 
at play. we genuflect 
in a ceremony of touching, go gung-ho 
into the amalgamating depths. 
after lorne 
the doughy older man in a marine bulldogs jacket 
signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
that's what it takes to get things done, he tells her 
and the rest of the waiting room.if nothing happens, 
you gotta investigate. that's what it means to be a marine. 
yes, lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit, 
her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
credo. yes, lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters 
wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths 
wide, lest we miss our last name/first initial flashed 
upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling. 
this room used to be a participatory democracy. 
now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
we read our patient education leaflets. we wait. 
outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city. 
anishnaabemowin 
this is what came before the world 
it was this 
that called the world 
into being 
so much older than what 
we speak now 
it has flowed through 
more of your ancestors 
than any other 
it has flowed within me 
even when i don't understand 
especially then 
i don't really know 
how you 
came into being 
it must have been this 
that called you 
bells 
stars originate from 
the same place as bells 
what should i be thinking about? 
apparently may 6th 
is world naked gardening day 
if a school were a uterus 
someone writes 
the politicians would protect 
the children inside 
a cupped hand 
a mouthful of water 
snowball the shape of a hand 
after 9/11 i remember writing 
something sarcastic 
intended to be zen 
a poem about not being able to find a sock 
i pissed off the poet 
george murray 
but i realize it's true 
anytime i've lost a sock 
someone's being shot 
even when i haven't lost one 
once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
to the lake 
tashlich: dropping bread into water 
casting off sins 
why am i doing this 
my son said don't believe in it 
what about making the world better? 
the rabbi asked 
yes my son said yes 
my son and i 
late autumn 
walking under the golden leaves 
on my desk 
a stapler, paperclips, some books 
laptop open to american news 
biscuit factory 
send my regards to the paris streets, the poet wrote * 
from exile in america. i will do the same to the room 
on alma, close to the eiffel tower, 
where i stayed with jeannie, from alaska, 
and her turkish friend, hanife. 
one room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
a toilet near the stair. while a man unlocked the door 
and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
into the foyer. the night of my 24thbirthday, 
the cards predicted disaster before i unfastened my handbag 
in the restaurant, to pay. someone had stolen my wallet 
and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
long distance for free. i lined up behind moroccans and turks, 
and phoned my mother at work where a kwakiutl sun 
blazed on the wall behind her. at lunchtime 
she went to the bank in her red high heels, 
and sent me money. why else am i here, 
but to wander until i remember 
the red brick ormand biscuit factory 
near where my father worked in victoria? 
thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
where condos now simper. my father climbed 
to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
to document gauges. we drove up in the chevy, 
to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted 
peter pan dress and stockings. he gave us treats— 
nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
and then my brother and i climbed up the side of the vats 
as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
and noticed us. you know, the condos there now, 
where the oil tanks were, 
and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage, 
are nothing to what happened to the girls 
i thought were my friends, and me. 
we lined up at dior in paris with the models, 
and went in. our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents. 
the breast for sappiness 
the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish 
conspiracy of love 
for those who are clean and sober 
the problem with trying to one-up yourself 
is not that you might die by your own hands, 
but that you'll be able to justify why 
without feeling anything. when you were 
in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt 
from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony 
to what you allowed: "i am satan, because i deal 
in language." the next day, you had stopped 
shaking, you went to work secular and clean. 
there were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
you know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts 
clicking together, lighting up your eyes. they are old 
technology made new, sleek and gleaming 
in crevasses like fog rolling around renfrew. 
you're awake today to see it, because you've been 
brave. you've noticed your friend has listened 
and told you very boring things—not dismissed 
them as errands. this is the task you will have to do, 
soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind 
moved—to write yourself into what you want 
to call conspiracy of love.when the guy from tinder 
said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you 
that he might know you from the internet. you didn't 
remember who he was, not even when he called you 
by your fake name. all you thought was, "i can't 
do this again. i want to be clean. i want to be shazia." 
if you end this poem here, it might make sense, 
but we both know this kind of work is occult. 
so, you have to ask me: how do you want to finish 
this poem? you have to leave it there. that way 
at least it's not about you anymore. 
cree dictionary 
the translation for joy 
in cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
the translation for bittersweet in cree 
looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
eight decades too late 
the translation for patience 
in cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children 
and two of her sister's 
the translation for evil 
in cree is the act of not calling 
your mother on a sunday 
the translation for expedition 
in cree is travelling 20 minutes 
to the only gas station in faust, alberta 
to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
the translation for success in cree 
is executing the perfect frog splash 
on your younger brother 
the cree word for white man is unpaid child support 
the translation for conflicted in cree 
is your deep, steadfast love 
for country superstar 
dwight yoakam (or depending on 
the regional dialect, 
george jones, patsy cline 
or blue rodeo) 
the cree word for constellation 
is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
the translation for policeman 
in cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
the translation for genius 
in cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep 
the cree word for poetry is your four-year-old 
niece's cracked lips spilling out 
broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between 
the gaps in her teeth 
crystals 
b clicks fistfuls of amethysts. b is six. earlier this week, 
in an agassiz campground, she held a tiny 
abandoned rabbit. watership down, 
but with ravers, 
fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, edm 
and bike lights, b's mother gripping 
capsules stuffed 
with crystals 
in her fist. i tell my mother i never want kids. my mother teaches 
motherhood in ontario woods, leads la leche league, 
squirrels worn-out clothes 
for quilts to send 
overseas. my blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy. 
these years as b's nanny, her nature scraping 
against my nurture. 
her mother 
couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected 
t cells, says she sometimes senses this 
distance. what bits of 
my mother 
insist in me? to what do i affix our distance? the burr thicket of it, 
sticky. the body's crystal arithmetic. b gives me 
an amethyst, tells me how 
the rabbit's heart 
beat beneath her fingertips. 
cxxvii 
i'm staring at shakespeare's poem. blocked. carnage because black was not counted fairly. torn into faithless weather because literature assured black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. the critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. informed since i could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of english, i've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of english thinking. the foreign anguish, language! with art's facelessness i borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. shame on who? shame on who? i'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. sometimes you see yourself profaned. sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? somebody doesn't. this situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if i don't bring work home. i'm churning through shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. my children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. they are with me always, as i fail at ease. they don't exist, as i cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard. 
diiiiiiiiid iiiiitttt happen 
the stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. you fill out index cards. press buttons. feel buoyed by laughter and attention. 
a question goes up on the board. you're in it to win it. you're not here to make friends. "what is—the reason she says she drinks." (yay, points!) 
"what is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
(points!)(points!)(points!) 
mom says, "i'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
she sweeps the board. (applause! cries!) 
it doesn't matter. you're pretty sure you're ahead. 
you're in the bonus round. you take turns. one person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. the audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming. 
doing the death we call pretty 
i could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
doing the death we call pretty. instead, i lord 
a little over people parking, coming & goingremark silent 
on body language—what gait is revealing— 
while i wait by the printer for a report 
i don't even need. the chore, it let me remember 
the world, free & flowing. on the hospital elevator 
this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman 
w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children. 
a young, halfway-pregnant couple. a womanmy mother's shape 
in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic. 
a surgeon'scrocs streaked w/purple-brown blood. 
jackson pollock.in the caf, a man tosses fries 
into his mouth for breakfast,his entire head & eyes 
bandaged up, white & soft as a q-tip. vision 
is my drug. i can't tell if it's working, b/c how 
did my life become a sequence of how do i kill 
the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
when is someone going to finally turnto me & say, 
all this time,what have you been doing? 
it will be an accusation, & a mercy. 
don 
don coles died today. today, katie, 
a student i taught, published her first 
book. i think of my teacher, mike, who don 
taught, and i think of all the lessons that 
don must have taught me through mike, all 
mike taught katie through me. i think of 
the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
cupped hands passing this water, without 
breaks, into another cupped pair. i'm amazed 
at how much we can drink and still have more 
to share. i think of all i learned from katie 
just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
the first poem in her first book, and i am 
amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
rush back through me to mike to don, 
another tributary in this miracle river 
that flows in both directions at once. it dawns 
on me how amazing it is that i can be a river 
at the same time that i'm a man underground, 
breaking down on a train, at the same time 
that i'm a ceaseless pen, that i'm blurred words 
clarified through tears, that i'm ink that dreams  it's 
elgin county 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
flattering 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
fuji, baby 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
how soon, how likely, how severe 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
kill poem 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
letter to atleo from the old shell station near buckhorn 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
the lipstick effect 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
marketplace 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
my mother gave me 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
nancy creek: end of summer 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
o sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
ode to the cockroach 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
derived from "golden fleece of the arctic," by john j. teal, jr., who rears musk oxen on his farm in vermont, as set forth in the march 1958 issue of the atlantic monthly. 
to wear the arctic fox 
you have to kill it. wear 
qiviut—the underwool of the arctic ox— 
pulled off it like a sweater; 
your coat is warm; your conscience, better. 
i would like a suit of 
qiviut, so light i did not 
know i had it on; and in the 
course of time, another 
since i had not had to murder 
the "goat" that grew the fleece 
that made the first. the musk ox 
has no musk and it is not an ox— 
illiterate epithet. 
bury your nose in one when wet. 
it smells of water, nothing else, 
and browses goatlike on 
hind legs. its great distinction 
is not egocentric scent 
but that it is intelligent. 
chinchillas, otters, water rats, 
and beavers keep us warm 
but think! a "musk ox" grows six pounds 
of qiviut; the cashmere ram, 
three ounces—that is all—of pashm. 
lying in an exposed spot, 
basking in the blizzard, 
these ponderosos could dominate 
the rare-hairs market in kashan and yet 
you could not have a choicer pet. 
they join you as you work; 
love jumping in and out of holes, 
play in water with the children, 
learn fast, know their names, 
will open gates and invent games. 
while not incapable 
of courtship, they may find its 
servitude and flutter, too much 
like procrustes’ bed; 
so some decide to stay unwed. 
camels are snobbish 
and sheep, unintelligent; 
water buffaloes, neurasthenic— 
even murderous. 
reindeer seem over-serious, 
whereas these scarce qivies, 
with golden fleece and winning ways, 
outstripping every fur-bearer— 
there in vermont quiet— 
could demand bold ruler’s diet: 
mountain valley water, 
dandelions, carrots, oats— 
encouraged as well—by bed 
made fresh three times a day, 
to roll and revel in the hay. 
insatiable for willow 
leaves alone, our goatlike 
qivi-curvi-capricornus 
sheds down ideal for a nest. 
song-birds find qiviut best. 
suppose you had a bag 
of it; you could spin a pound 
into a twenty-four-or-five- 
mile thread—one, forty-ply— 
that will not shrink in any dye. 
if you fear that you are 
reading an advertisement, 
you are. if we can’t be cordial 
to these creatures’ fleece, 
i think that we deserve to freeze. 
saint nicholas, 
might i, if you can find it, be given 
a chameleon with tail 
that curls like a watch spring; and vertical 
on the body—including the face—pale 
tiger-stripes, about seven; 
(the melanin in the skin 
having been shaded from the sun by thin 
bars; the spinal dome 
beaded along the ridge 
as if it were platinum). 
if you can find no striped chameleon, 
might i have a dress or suit— 
i guess you have heard of it—of qiviut? 
and to wear with it, a taslon shirt, the drip-dry fruit 
of research second to none; 
sewn, i hope, by excello; 
as for buttons to keep down the collar-points, no. 
the shirt could be white— 
and be "worn before six," 
either in daylight or at night. 
but don’t give me, if i can’t have the dress, 
a trip to greenland, or grim 
trip to the moon. the moon should come here. let him 
make the trip down, spread on my dark floor some dim 
marvel, and if a success 
that i stoop to pick up and wear, 
i could ask nothing more. a thing yet more rare, 
though, and different, 
would be this: hans von marées’ 
st. hubert, kneeling with head bent, 
form erect—in velvet, tense with restraint— 
hand hanging down: the horse, free. 
not the original, of course. give me 
a postcard of the scene—huntsman and divinity— 
hunt-mad hubert startled into a saint 
by a stag with a figure entined. 
but why tell you what you must have divined? 
the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish 
conspiracy of love 
for those who are clean and sober 
the problem with trying to one-up yourself 
is not that you might die by your own hands, 
but that you'll be able to justify why 
without feeling anything. when you were 
in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt 
from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony 
to what you allowed: "i am satan, because i deal 
in language." the next day, you had stopped 
shaking, you went to work secular and clean. 
there were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
you know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts 
clicking together, lighting up your eyes. they are old 
technology made new, sleek and gleaming 
in crevasses like fog rolling around renfrew. 
you're awake today to see it, because you've been 
brave. you've noticed your friend has listened 
and told you very boring things—not dismissed 
them as errands. this is the task you will have to do, 
soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind 
moved—to write yourself into what you want 
in what sense shall we be able to 
secure to ourselves peace and do as they did— 
who, when they were not able to rid 
themselves of war, cast out fear? 
they did not say: "we shall not be brought 
into subjection by the naughtiness of the sea; 
though we have ‘defeated ourselves with 
false balances’ and laid weapons in the scale, 
glory shall spring from in-glory; hail, 
flood, earthquake, and famine shall 
not intimidate us nor shake the 
foundations of our inalienable energy." 
black in blazonry means 
prudence; and niger, unpropitious. might 
hematite- 
black incurved compact horns on a bison 
have significance? the 
soot brown tail-tuft on 
a kind of lion- 
tail; what would that express? 
and john steuart curry’s ajax pulling 
grass—no ring 
in his nose—two birds standing on his back? 
though prints like this cannot 
show if they were black 
birds, nor the color 
of the back. the modern 
ox does not look like the augsburg ox’s 
portrait. yes, 
the great extinct wild aurochs was a beast 
to paint, with stripe and sixfoot 
horn-spread—decreased 
to siamese-cat- 
brown swiss size, or zebu 
shape with white plush dewlap and warm-blooded 
hump; to red- 
skinned hereford or to piebald holstein. yet 
some would say the sparse-haired 
buffalo has met 
human notions best— 
unlike the elephant, 
both jewel and jeweler in the hairs 
that he wears— 
no white-nosed vermont ox yoked with its twin 
to haul the maple sap, 
up to their knees in 
snow; no freakishly 
over-drove ox drawn by 
rowlandson, but the indian buffalo, 
albino- 
footed, standing in the mud-lake, with a 
day’s work to do. no white 
christian heathen, waylaid 
by the buddha, 
serves him so well as the 
buffalo—as mettlesome as if check- 
reined—free neck 
stretching out, and snake-tail in a half twist 
on the flank; nor will so 
cheerfully assist 
the sage sitting with 
feet at the same side, to 
dismount at the shrine; nor are there any 
ivory 
tusks like those two horns which when a tiger 
coughs, are lowered fiercely 
and convert the fur 
to harmless rubbish. 
the indian buffalo, 
led by bare-leggèd herd-boys to a hay 
hut where they 
stable it, need not fear comparison 
with bison, with the twins, 
nor with anyone 
of ox ancestry. 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
wade 
through black jade. 
of the crow-blue mussel shells, one 
keeps 
adjusting the ash heaps; 
opening and shutting itself like 
an 
injured fan. 
the barnacles which encrust the 
side 
of the wave, cannot hide 
there for the submerged shafts of the 
sun, 
split like spun 
glass, move themselves with spotlight swift- 
ness 
into the crevices— 
in and out, illuminating 
the 
turquoise sea 
of bodies. the water drives a 
wedge 
of iron through the iron edge 
of the cliff, whereupon the stars, 
pink 
rice grains, ink 
bespattered jelly-fish, crabs like 
green 
lilies and submarine 
toadstools, slide each on the other. 
all 
external 
marks of abuse are present on 
this 
defiant edifice— 
all the physical features of 
ac- 
cident—lack 
of cornice, dynamite grooves, burns 
and 
hatchet strokes, these things stand 
out on it; the chasm side is 
dead. 
repeated 
evidence has proved that it can 
live 
on what cannot revive 
its youth. the sea grows old in it. 
rapidly cruising or lying on the air there is a bird 
that realizes rasselas’s friend’s project 
of wings uniting levity with strength. this 
hell-diver, frigate-bird, hurricane- 
bird; unless swift is the proper word 
for him, the storm omen when 
he flies close to the waves, should be seen 
fishing, although oftener 
he appears to prefer 
to take, on the wing, from industrious cruder-winged species 
the fish they have caught, and is seldom successless. 
a marvel of grace, no matter how fast his 
victim may fly or how often may 
turn, the dishonest pelican’s ease 
in pursuit, bears him away 
with the fish that the badgered bird drops. 
a kind of superlative 
swallow, that likes to live 
on food caught while flying, he is not a pelican. the toe 
with slight web, air-boned body, and very long wings 
with the spread of a swan’s—duplicating a 
bow-string as he floats overhead—feel 
the changing v-shaped scissor swallow- 
tail direct the rigid keel. 
and steering beak to windward always, 
the fleetest foremost fairy 
among birds, outflies the 
aeroplane which cannot flap its wings nor alter any quill- 
tip. for him, the feeling in a hand, in fins, is 
in his unbent downbent crafty oar. with him 
other pelicans aimlessly soar 
as he does; separating, until 
not flapping they rise once more, 
closing in without looking and move 
outward again to the top 
of the circle and stop 
and blow back, allowing the wind to reverse their direction. 
this is not the stalwart swan that can ferry the 
woodcutter’s two children home; no. make hay; keep 
the shop; i have one sheep; were a less 
limber animal’s mottoes. this one 
finds sticks for the swan’s-down dress 
of his child to rest upon and would 
not know gretel from hänsel. 
as impassioned handel— 
meant for a lawyer and a masculine german domestic 
career—clandestinely studied the harpsichord 
and never was known to have fallen in love, 
the unconfiding frigate-bird hides 
in the height and in the majestic 
display of his art. he glides 
a hundred feet or quivers about 
as charred paper behaves—full 
of feints; and an eagle 
of vigilance, earns the term aquiline; keeping at a height 
so great the feathers look black and the beak does not 
show. it is not retreat but exclusion from 
which he looks down and observes what went 
secretly, as it thought, out of sight 
among dense jungle plants. sent 
ahead of the rest, there goes the true 
knight in his jointed coat that 
covers all but his bat 
ears; a-trot, with stiff pig gait—our tame armadillo, loosed by 
his master and as pleased as a dog. beside the 
spattered blood—that orchid which the native fears— 
the fer-de-lance lies sleeping; centaur- 
like, this harmful couple’s amity 
is apropos. a jaguar 
and crocodile are fighting. sharp-shinned 
hawks and peacock-freckled small 
cats, like the literal 
merry-go-round, come wandering within the circular view 
of the high bird for whom from the air they are ants 
keeping house all their lives in the crack of a 
crag with no view from the top. and here, 
unlikely animals learning to 
dance, crouch on two steeds that rear 
behind a leopard with a frantic 
face, tamed by an artemis 
who wears a dress like his, 
and hampering haymaker’s hat. festina lente. be gay 
civilly. how so? "if i do well i am blessed 
whether any bless me or not, and if i do 
ill i am cursed." we watch the moon rise 
on the susquehanna. in his way 
this most romantic bird, flies 
to a more mundane place, the mangrove 
swamp, to sleep. he wastes the moon. 
but he, and others, soon 
rise from the bough, and though flying are able to foil the tired 
moment of danger, that lays on heart and lungs the 
weight of the python that crushes to powder. 
the tune’s illiterate footsteps fail; 
the steam hacks are not to be admired. 
these, unturbulent, avail 
themselves of turbulence to fly—pleased 
with the faint wind’s varyings, 
on which to spread fixed wings. 
the reticent lugubrious ragged immense minuet 
descending to leeward, ascending to windward 
again without flapping, in what seems to be 
a way of resting, are now nearer, 
but as seemingly bodiless yet 
as they were. theirs are somber 
quills for so wide and lightboned a bird 
as the frigate pelican 
of the caribbean. 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
"in buckinghamshire hedgerows 
the birds nesting in the merged green density, 
weave little bits of string and moths and feathers and thistledown, 
in parabolic concentric curves" 
and, working for concavity, leave spherical feats of rare efficiency; 
whereas through lack of integration, 
avid for someone’s fortune, 
three were slain and ten committed perjury, 
six died, two killed themselves, and two paid fines for risks they’d run. 
but then there is the icosasphere 
in which at last we have steel-cutting at its summit of economy, 
since twenty triangles conjoined, can wrap one 
ball or double-rounded shell 
with almost no waste, so geometrically 
neat, it’s an icosahedron. would the engineers making one, 
or mr. j. o. jackson tell us 
how the egyptians could have set up seventy-eight-foot solid granite vertically? 
we should like to know how that was done. 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
his pie. "i would be 
repossessed of all the 
superlatives that i have squandered, 
that i might use them in praise of it." 
the four and twenty 
birds were singing while he 
apportioned it off casually 
and found in it nothing for himself. 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
we have ours; and they 
have theirs. ours has a skin feather crest; 
theirs has wings out from the waist which is snuff-brown or sallow. 
ours falls from trees on water; theirs is the smallest 
dragon that knows how to dive head-first from a tree-top to something dry. 
floating on spread ribs, 
the boat-like body settles on the 
clamshell-tinted spray sprung from the nutmeg-tree—minute legs 
trailing half akimbo—the true divinity 
of malay. among unfragrant orchids, on the unnutritious nut 
tree, myristica 
fragrans, the harmless god spreads ribs that 
do not raise a hood. this is the serpent-dove peculiar 
to the east; that lives as the butterfly or bat 
can, in a brood, conferring wings on what it grasps, as the air-plant does. 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
even with its own ax to grind, sometimes 
helps others. why can’t it help me? 
o imagnifico, 
wizard in words—poet, was it, as 
alfredo panzini defined you? 
weren’t you refracting just now 
on my eye’s half-closed triptych 
the image, enhanced, of a glen— 
"the foxgrape festoon as sere leaves fell" 
on the sand-pale dark byroad, one leaf adrift 
from the thin-twigged persimmon; again, 
a bird—arizona 
caught-up-with, uncatchable cuckoo 
after two hours’ pursuit, zigzagging 
road-runner, stenciled in black 
stripes all over, the tail 
windmilling up to defy me? 
you understand terror, know how to deal 
with pent-up emotion, a ballad, witchcraft. 
i don’t. o zeus and o destiny! 
unafraid of what’s done, 
undeterred by apparent defeat, 
you, imagnifico, unafraid 
of disparagers, death, dejection, 
have out-wiled the mermaid of zennor, 
made wordcraft irresistible: 
reef, wreck, lost lad, and "sea-foundered bell"— 
as near a thing as we have to a king— 
craft with which i don’t know how to deal. 
is an enchanted thing 
like the glaze on a 
katydid-wing 
subdivided by sun 
till the nettings are legion. 
like gieseking playing scarlatti; 
like the apteryx-awl 
as a beak, or the 
kiwi’s rain-shawl 
of haired feathers, the mind 
feeling its way as though blind, 
walks along with its eyes on the ground. 
it has memory’s ear 
that can hear without 
having to hear. 
like the gyroscope’s fall, 
truly unequivocal 
because trued by regnant certainty, 
it is a power of 
strong enchantment. it 
is like the dove- 
neck animated by 
sun; it is memory’s eye; 
it’s conscientious inconsistency. 
it tears off the veil; tears 
the temptation, the 
mist the heart wears, 
from its eyes,—if the heart 
has a face; it takes apart 
dejection. it’s fire in the dove-neck’s 
iridescence; in the 
inconsistencies 
of scarlatti. 
unconfusion submits 
its confusion to proof; it’s 
not a herod’s oath that cannot change. 
a kind of monkey or pine-lemur 
not of interest to the monkey, 
but to the animal higher up which resembles it, 
in a kind of flaubert’s carthage, it defies one— 
this "paduan cat with lizard," this "tiger in a bamboo thicket." 
"an interwoven somewhat," it will not come out. 
ignore the foo dog and it is forthwith more than a dog, 
its tail superimposed upon itself in a complacent half spiral, 
incidentally so witty; 
but this pine-tree—this pine-tiger, is a tiger, not a dog. 
it knows that if a nomad may have dignity, 
gibraltar has had more— 
that "it is better to be lonely than unhappy." 
a conifer contrived in imitation of the glyptic work of jade and hard stone cutters, 
a true curio in this bypath of curio collecting, 
it is worth its weight in gold but no one takes it 
from these woods in which society’s not knowing is colossal, 
the lion’s ferocious chrysanthemum head seeming kind in comparison. 
this porcupine-quilled, infinitely complicated starkness— 
this is beauty—"a certain proportion in the skeleton which gives the best results." 
one is at a loss, however, to know why it should be here, 
in this morose part of the earth— 
to account for its origin at all; 
but we prove, we do not explain our birth. 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
another armored animal—scale 
lapping scale with spruce-cone regu- 
larity until they 
form the uninterrupted central 
tail-row. this near artichoke 
with head and legs and grit-equipped giz- 
zard, the night miniature artist- 
engineer, is    leonardo’s 
indubitable son? im- 
pressive animal 
and toiler, of whom we seldom hear. 
armor seems extra. but for him, 
the closing ear- 
ridge—or bare 
ear, lacking even this small 
eminence—and similarly safe 
contracting nose and eye apertures 
impenetrably closable, 
are not;—a true ant-eat- 
er, not cockroach-eater, who endures 
exhausting solitary 
trips through unfamiliar ground at night, 
returning before sunrise; stepping 
in the moonlight,    on the moonlight 
peculiarly, that the out- 
side edges of his 
hands may bear the weight and save the claws 
for digging. serpentined about 
the tree, he draws 
away from 
danger unpugnaciously, 
with no sound but a harmless hiss; keep- 
ing the fragile grace of the thomas- 
of-leighton-buzzard westminster 
abbey wrought-iron vine, or 
rolls himself into a ball that has 
power to defy all effort 
to unroll it;—strongly intailed, neat 
head for core, on neck not breaking off, 
with curled-in feet. nevertheless 
he has sting-proof scales; and nest 
of rocks closed with earth 
from inside, which he can thus darken. 
sun and moon \& day and night \& man and beast 
each with a splen- 
dor which man 
in all his vileness cannot 
set aside; each with an excellence! 
"fearful yet to be feared," the armored 
ant-eater met by the driver 
ant does not turn back, but 
engulfs what he can, the flattened sword- 
edged leafpoints on the tail and 
artichoke-set leg and body plates 
quivering violently when it 
retaliates    and swarms on him. 
compact like the furled fringed frill 
on the hat-brim of 
gargallo’s hollow iron head of a 
matador, he will drop and will 
then walk away 
unhurt, al- 
though if unintruded on 
he will come slowly down the tree, helped 
by his tail. the giant-pangolin 
tail, graceful tool, as prop or hand 
or broom or axe, tipped like 
the elephant’s trunk with special skin, 
is not lost on this ant and 
stone swallowing uninjurable 
artichoke, which simpletons thought a 
living fable    whom the stones had 
nourished whereas ants had done 
so. pangolins are 
not aggressive animals; between 
dusk and day, they have the not un- 
chainlike, machine- 
like form and 
frictionless creep of a thing 
made graceful by adversities, con- 
versities. to explain grace requires 
a curious hand. if that which 
is at all were not for 
ever, why would those who graced the spires 
with animals and gathered 
there to rest, on cold luxurious 
low stone seats—a monk and monk and monk— 
between the thus ingenious roof- 
supports, have slaved to confuse 
grace with a kindly 
manner, time in which to pay a debt, 
the cure for sins, a graceful use 
of what are yet 
approved stone 
mullions branching out across 
the perpendiculars? a sailboat 
was the first machine. the manis, made 
for moving quietly also, 
is neither a prisoner 
nor a god; on hind feet plantigrade, 
with certain postures of a 
man. beneath sun and moon, man slaving 
to make his life more sweet, leaves half the 
flowers worth having,    needing to choose 
wisely how to use the strength;— 
a paper-maker 
like the wasp; a tractor of food-stuffs, 
like the ant; spidering a length 
of web from bluffs 
above a 
stream; in fighting, mechanicked 
like the pangolin; capsizing in 
disheartenment. bedizened or stark 
naked, man, the self, the being 
so-called human, writingmaster 
to this world, griffons a dark 
"like does not like like that is 
obnoxious"; and writes errror with four 
r’s. among animals, one has a 
sense of humor    then, which saves a 
few steps, which saves years—unig- 
norant, modest and 
unemotional, and all emo- 
tion; one with everlasting vig- 
or, power to grow 
though there are 
few of him—who can make one 
breathe faster, and make one erecter. 
not afraid of anything is he 
and then goes cowering forth, tread paced 
to meet an obstacle 
at every step. consistent with the 
formula—warm blood, no gills, 
two pairs of hands and a few hairs—that 
is a mammal; there he sits in his 
own habitat,    serge-clad, strong-shod. 
the prey of fear; he, always 
curtailed, extinguished, 
thwarted by the dusk, work partly done, 
says to the alternating blaze, 
"again the sun! 
anew each 
day; and new and new and new, 
that comes into and steadies my soul. 
for authorities whose hopes 
are shaped by mercenaries? 
writers entrapped by 
teatime fame and by 
commuters’ comforts? not for these 
the paper nautilus 
constructs her thin glass shell. 
giving her perishable 
souvenir of hope, a dull 
white outside and smooth- 
edged inner surface 
glossy as the sea, the watchful 
maker of it guards it 
day and night; she scarcely 
eats until the eggs are hatched. 
buried eight-fold in her eight 
arms, for she is in 
a sense a devil- 
fish, her glass ramshorn-cradled freight 
is hid but is not crushed. 
as hercules, bitten 
by a crab loyal to the hydra, 
was hindered to succeed, 
the intensively 
watched eggs coming from 
the shell free it when they are freed,— 
leaving its wasp-nest flaws 
of white on white, and close- 
laid ionic chiton-folds 
like the lines in the mane of 
a parthenon horse, 
round which the arms had 
wound themselves as if they knew love 
is the only fortress 
strong enough to trust to. 
revived bitterness 
is unnecessary unless 
one is ignorant. 
to-morrow will be 
yesterday unless you say the 
days of the week back- 
ward. last weeks’ circus 
overflow frames an old grudge. thus: 
when you attempt to 
force the doors and come 
at the cause of the shouts, you thumb 
a brass nailed echo. 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
dürer would have seen a reason for living 
in a town like this, with eight stranded whales 
to look at; with the sweet sea air coming into your house 
on a fine day, from water etched 
with waves as formal as the scales 
on a fish. 
one by one, in two’s, in three’s, the seagulls keep 
flying back and forth over the town clock, 
or sailing around the lighthouse without moving the wings— 
rising steadily with a slight 
quiver of the body—or flock 
mewing where 
a sea the purple of the peacock’s neck is 
paled to greenish azure as dürer changed 
the pine green of the tyrol to peacock blue and guinea 
grey. you can see a twenty-five 
pound lobster; and fishnets arranged 
to dry. the 
whirlwind fifeanddrum of the storm bends the salt 
marsh grass, disturbs stars in the sky and the 
star on the steeple; it is a privilege to see so 
much confusion. disguised by what 
might seem austerity, the seaside 
flowers and 
trees are favored by the fog so that you have 
the tropics at first hand: the trumpet-vine, 
fox-glove, giant snap-dragon, a salpiglossis that has 
spots and stripes; morning-glories, gourds, 
or moon-vines trained on fishing-twine 
at the back 
door; cat-tails, flags, blueberries and spiderwort, 
striped grass, lichens, sunflowers, asters, daisies— 
the yellow and the crab-claw blue ones with green bracts—toad-plant, 
petunias, ferns; pink lilies, blue 
ones, tigers; poppies; black sweet-peas. 
the climate 
is not right for the banyan, frangipani, the 
jack-fruit tree; nor for exotic serpent 
life. ring lizard and snake-skin for the foot if you see fit, 
but here they’ve cats not cobras to 
keep down the rats. the diffident 
little newt 
with white pin-dots on black horizontal spaced 
out bands lives here; yet there is nothing that 
ambition can buy or take away. the college student 
named ambrose sits on the hill-side 
with his not-native books and hat 
and sees boats 
at sea progress white and rigid as if in 
a groove. liking an elegance of which 
the source is not bravado, he knows by heart the antique 
sugar-bowl shaped summer-house of 
interlacing slats, and the pitch 
of the church 
spire, not true, from which a man in scarlet lets 
down a rope as a spider spins a thread; 
he might be part of a novel, but on the sidewalk a 
sign says c. j. poole, steeple-jack, 
in black and white; and one in red 
and white says 
danger. the church portico has four fluted 
columns, each a single piece of stone, made 
modester by white-wash. this would be a fit haven for 
waifs, children, animals, prisoners, 
and presidents who have repaid 
sin-driven 
senators by not thinking about them. there 
are a school-house, a post-office in a 
store, fish-houses, hen-houses, a three-masted schooner on 
the stocks. the hero, the student, 
the steeple-jack, each in his way, 
is at home. 
it could not be dangerous to be living 
in a town like this, of simple people, 
who have a steeple-jack placing danger signs by the church 
while he is gilding the solidpointed 
star, which on a steeple 
stands for hope. 
in america everybody must have a degree," the french man 
says, "but the french do not think that all can have it; they don’t 
say everyone must go to college." we 
may feel as he says we do; five kinds of superiority 
might be unattainable by all, but one degree is not too much. 
in each school there is a pair of fruit-trees like that twin tree 
in every other school: tree-of-knowledge— 
tree-of-life—each with a label like that of the other college: 
lux, or lux et veritas, christo et ecclesiae, sapiet 
felici, and if science confers immortality, 
these apple-trees should be for everyone. 
oriental arbor vitae we say lightly. yet you pardon 
it as when one thinking of the navy does not know not to infer 
dishonorable discharge from a d. d. it is a 
thoughtful pupil has two thoughts for the word 
valet; or for bachelor, child, damsel; though no one having heard 
them used as terms of chivalry would make the medieval use of 
them. secluded from domestic strife, jack bookworm led a 
college life says goldsmith. he might not say 
it of the student who shows interest in the stranger’s resumé 
by asking "when will your experiment be finished, doctor einstein?" 
and is pleased when doctor einstein smiles and says politely 
"science is never finished." but we’re not 
hypocrites, we’re rustics. the football huddle in the vacant lot 
is impersonating calculus and physics and military 
books; and is gathering the data for genetics. if 
scholarship would profit by it, sixteenfoot 
men should be grown; it’s for the football men to say. we must lean 
on their experience. there is vitality in the world of sport. 
if it is not the tree of knowledge, it’s the tree of life. 
when audubon adopted us he taught 
us how to dance. it was the great crab-flounder of montana caught 
and changed from that which creeps to that which is angelic. he taught us how 
to turn as the airport wind-sock turns without an error; 
like alligator, downpour, dynamite, 
and wotan, gliding round the course in a fast neat school, with the white 
of the eye showing; or as sea-lions keep going round and round the 
pool. but there is more to learn—the difference between cow 
and zebu; lion, tiger; barred and brown 
owls; horned owls have one ear that opens up and one that opens down. 
the golden eagle is the one with feathered legs. the penguin wing is 
ancient, not degenerate. swordfish are different from 
gars, if one may speak of gars when the big 
gamehunters are using the fastidious singular—say pig, 
and that they have seen camelsparrow, tigerhorse, rat, mouse, butterfly, 
snake, elephant, fruit-bat, et cet’ra. no fact of science— 
theology or biology—might 
not as well be known; one does not care to hold opinions that fright 
could dislocate. education augments our natural forces and 
prompts us to extend the machinery of advantage 
to those who are without it. one fitted 
to be a scholar must have the heroic mind, emerson said. 
the student concentrates and does not like to fight; "gives his opinion 
firmly and rests on it"—in the manner of the poet; 
is reclusive, and reserved; and has such 
ways, not because he has no feeling but because he has so much. 
boasting provokes jibes, and in this country we’ve no cause to boast; we are 
as a nation perhaps, undergraduates not students. 
but anyone who studies will advance. 
are we to grow up or not? they are not all college boys in france. 
against a gun-metal sky 
i saw an albino giraffe. without 
leaves to modify, 
chamois-white as 
said, though partly pied near the base, 
it towered where a chain of 
stepping-stones lay in a stream nearby; 
glamour to stir the envy 
of anything in motley— 
hampshire pig, the living lucky-stone; or 
all-white butterfly. 
a commonplace: 
there’s more than just one kind of grace. 
we don’t like flowers that do 
not wilt; they must die, and nine 
she-camel-hairs aid memory. 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
good day villanelle 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
materials 
at the farm 
bare 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
earworm 
mayor snow 
the walls 
through the restaurant window 
we bought a little city 
self-portrait 
not saying 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
poems: 
above picasso and his musings 
1. 
ineptitude's tidings 
ashore me, i'm sprawling stumble- 
drunk in seawrack 
and this grandiose spree of green 
beholds an odd bouquet. 
back at the old sandy blanket, our bodies 
mold mayhem; 
math majors enumerate games 
in the indivisible darkness. 
during a breather, we marvel at the midnight bay 
as it welters moseyingly 
under terminal city's distant subtractions. 
on higher ground, 
my bed has sprung a squeak. tempest- 
tossed, we let it squawk. 
2. 
at loftier 
elevations: picasso and his muses, 
an exhibit we visit 
on our friendship date. 
under a thrust of rain, 
we give up on appearances and sling warmth; 
a false-creeker 
shouts hubba-hubba. 
we shroud the light in a beach-blanket. 
this is more or less 
how it all came to pass. i have no secrets 
in my vending machine home. 
3. 
pablo diego josé francisco de paula juan 
nepomuceno maría de los remedios cipriano 
de la santísima trinidad ruiz y picasso, 
a baby soothered in saints. 
fernande olivier. orphan. pedastelled sixty times. 
pablo builds her a shrine. we stand 
close in front of the dancing 
olga khokhlova minutes. susurrations red-carpet 
marie-thérèse walter's allegorized 
lips. we almost touch by the dora 
maar moments under "a comfortable routine 
interrupted by world war two." 
we read ever so close, then glide 
by geneviève laporte who refuses to move 
in with her lover, which is what 
(she tells françoise gilot) 
"saves her skin." 
later, old pablo mistakes 
a parking meter in madrid 
for jacqueline roque's face. he paints 
the parking meter seventy times. 
4. 
on our second date 
you hold out a gift. i open 
a white piece of paper 
with more creases than a hundred 
hands. it's a map, 
you say. next, you make 
a compass from blue string. 
this will guide 
me through my beachcombing time 
collecting gribble-wrought scrimshaw 
for a sculpture i'm building to the annals 
of honesty hoarders. i'm part 
of many secret clubs. you 
shall know us by our bookshelves' 
blisteringly thin spines. 
i should have put 
that out-of-order sign on my cubist 
pile of a soul long ago. 
some coinage is stuck 
behind my five-dimensional eyes, 
but i want everything 
and you, your mind 
of galax, ivy, peruvian lily, pine, 
pussy willow, yellow rose, and other 
secret handshakes from flowers. 
you incite objects into a rube goldberg 
kabbalah, you're a radiance-chain 
of life-hacks, embroidery, and odyssean cunning. 
as i work out my zonked 
manufacturing to make way towards us 
at play. we genuflect 
in a ceremony of touching, go gung-ho 
into the amalgamating depths. 
after lorne 
the doughy older man in a marine bulldogs jacket 
signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
that's what it takes to get things done, he tells her 
and the rest of the waiting room.if nothing happens, 
you gotta investigate. that's what it means to be a marine. 
yes, lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit, 
her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
credo. yes, lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters 
wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths 
wide, lest we miss our last name/first initial flashed 
upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling. 
this room used to be a participatory democracy. 
now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
we read our patient education leaflets. we wait. 
outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city. 
anishnaabemowin 
this is what came before the world 
it was this 
that called the world 
into being 
so much older than what 
we speak now 
it has flowed through 
more of your ancestors 
than any other 
it has flowed within me 
even when i don't understand 
especially then 
i don't really know 
how you 
came into being 
it must have been this 
that called you 
bells 
stars originate from 
the same place as bells 
what should i be thinking about? 
apparently may 6th 
is world naked gardening day 
if a school were a uterus 
someone writes 
the politicians would protect 
the children inside 
a cupped hand 
a mouthful of water 
snowball the shape of a hand 
after 9/11 i remember writing 
something sarcastic 
intended to be zen 
a poem about not being able to find a sock 
i pissed off the poet 
george murray 
but i realize it's true 
anytime i've lost a sock 
someone's being shot 
even when i haven't lost one 
once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
to the lake 
tashlich: dropping bread into water 
casting off sins 
why am i doing this 
my son said don't believe in it 
what about making the world better? 
the rabbi asked 
yes my son said yes 
my son and i 
late autumn 
walking under the golden leaves 
on my desk 
a stapler, paperclips, some books 
laptop open to american news 
biscuit factory 
send my regards to the paris streets, the poet wrote * 
from exile in america. i will do the same to the room 
on alma, close to the eiffel tower, 
where i stayed with jeannie, from alaska, 
and her turkish friend, hanife. 
one room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
a toilet near the stair. while a man unlocked the door 
and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
into the foyer. the night of my 24thbirthday, 
the cards predicted disaster before i unfastened my handbag 
in the restaurant, to pay. someone had stolen my wallet 
and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
long distance for free. i lined up behind moroccans and turks, 
and phoned my mother at work where a kwakiutl sun 
blazed on the wall behind her. at lunchtime 
she went to the bank in her red high heels, 
and sent me money. why else am i here, 
but to wander until i remember 
the red brick ormand biscuit factory 
near where my father worked in victoria? 
thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
where condos now simper. my father climbed 
to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
to document gauges. we drove up in the chevy, 
to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted 
peter pan dress and stockings. he gave us treats— 
nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
and then my brother and i climbed up the side of the vats 
as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
and noticed us. you know, the condos there now, 
where the oil tanks were, 
and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage, 
are nothing to what happened to the girls 
i thought were my friends, and me. 
we lined up at dior in paris with the models, 
and went in. our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents. 
the breast for sappiness 
the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish 
conspiracy of love 
for those who are clean and sober 
the problem with trying to one-up yourself 
is not that you might die by your own hands, 
but that you'll be able to justify why 
without feeling anything. when you were 
in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt 
from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony 
to what you allowed: "i am satan, because i deal 
in language." the next day, you had stopped 
shaking, you went to work secular and clean. 
there were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
you know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts 
clicking together, lighting up your eyes. they are old 
technology made new, sleek and gleaming 
in crevasses like fog rolling around renfrew. 
you're awake today to see it, because you've been 
brave. you've noticed your friend has listened 
and told you very boring things—not dismissed 
them as errands. this is the task you will have to do, 
soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind 
moved—to write yourself into what you want 
to call conspiracy of love.when the guy from tinder 
said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you 
that he might know you from the internet. you didn't 
remember who he was, not even when he called you 
by your fake name. all you thought was, "i can't 
do this again. i want to be clean. i want to be shazia." 
if you end this poem here, it might make sense, 
but we both know this kind of work is occult. 
so, you have to ask me: how do you want to finish 
this poem? you have to leave it there. that way 
at least it's not about you anymore. 
cree dictionary 
the translation for joy 
in cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
the translation for bittersweet in cree 
looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
eight decades too late 
the translation for patience 
in cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children 
and two of her sister's 
the translation for evil 
in cree is the act of not calling 
your mother on a sunday 
the translation for expedition 
in cree is travelling 20 minutes 
to the only gas station in faust, alberta 
to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
the translation for success in cree 
is executing the perfect frog splash 
on your younger brother 
the cree word for white man is unpaid child support 
the translation for conflicted in cree 
is your deep, steadfast love 
for country superstar 
dwight yoakam (or depending on 
the regional dialect, 
george jones, patsy cline 
or blue rodeo) 
the cree word for constellation 
is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
the translation for policeman 
in cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
the translation for genius 
in cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep 
the cree word for poetry is your four-year-old 
niece's cracked lips spilling out 
broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between 
the gaps in her teeth 
crystals 
b clicks fistfuls of amethysts. b is six. earlier this week, 
in an agassiz campground, she held a tiny 
abandoned rabbit. watership down, 
but with ravers, 
fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, edm 
and bike lights, b's mother gripping 
capsules stuffed 
with crystals 
in her fist. i tell my mother i never want kids. my mother teaches 
motherhood in ontario woods, leads la leche league, 
squirrels worn-out clothes 
for quilts to send 
overseas. my blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy. 
these years as b's nanny, her nature scraping 
against my nurture. 
her mother 
couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected 
t cells, says she sometimes senses this 
distance. what bits of 
my mother 
insist in me? to what do i affix our distance? the burr thicket of it, 
sticky. the body's crystal arithmetic. b gives me 
an amethyst, tells me how 
the rabbit's heart 
beat beneath her fingertips. 
cxxvii 
i'm staring at shakespeare's poem. blocked. carnage because black was not counted fairly. torn into faithless weather because literature assured black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. the critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. informed since i could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of english, i've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of english thinking. the foreign anguish, language! with art's facelessness i borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. shame on who? shame on who? i'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. sometimes you see yourself profaned. sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? somebody doesn't. this situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if i don't bring work home. i'm churning through shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. my children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. they are with me always, as i fail at ease. they don't exist, as i cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard. 
diiiiiiiiid iiiiitttt happen 
the stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. you fill out index cards. press buttons. feel buoyed by laughter and attention. 
a question goes up on the board. you're in it to win it. you're not here to make friends. "what is—the reason she says she drinks." (yay, points!) 
"what is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
(points!)(points!)(points!) 
mom says, "i'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
she sweeps the board. (applause! cries!) 
it doesn't matter. you're pretty sure you're ahead. 
you're in the bonus round. you take turns. one person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. the audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming. 
doing the death we call pretty 
i could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
doing the death we call pretty. instead, i lord 
a little over people parking, coming & goingremark silent 
on body language—what gait is revealing— 
while i wait by the printer for a report 
i don't even need. the chore, it let me remember 
the world, free & flowing. on the hospital elevator 
this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman 
w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children. 
a young, halfway-pregnant couple. a womanmy mother's shape 
in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic. 
a surgeon'scrocs streaked w/purple-brown blood. 
jackson pollock.in the caf, a man tosses fries 
into his mouth for breakfast,his entire head & eyes 
bandaged up, white & soft as a q-tip. vision 
is my drug. i can't tell if it's working, b/c how 
did my life become a sequence of how do i kill 
the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
when is someone going to finally turnto me & say, 
all this time,what have you been doing? 
it will be an accusation, & a mercy. 
don 
don coles died today. today, katie, 
a student i taught, published her first 
book. i think of my teacher, mike, who don 
taught, and i think of all the lessons that 
don must have taught me through mike, all 
mike taught katie through me. i think of 
the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
cupped hands passing this water, without 
breaks, into another cupped pair. i'm amazed 
at how much we can drink and still have more 
to share. i think of all i learned from katie 
just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
the first poem in her first book, and i am 
amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
rush back through me to mike to don, 
another tributary in this miracle river 
that flows in both directions at once. it dawns 
on me how amazing it is that i can be a river 
at the same time that i'm a man underground, 
breaking down on a train, at the same time 
that i'm a ceaseless pen, that i'm blurred words 
clarified through tears, that i'm ink that dreams  it's 
elgin county 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
flattering 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
fuji, baby 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
how soon, how likely, how severe 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
kill poem 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
letter to atleo from the old shell station near buckhorn 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
the lipstick effect 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
marketplace 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
my mother gave me 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
nancy creek: end of summer 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
o sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
ode to the cockroach 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
transition 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
tu me manques 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
under construction 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
union station 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
witch hunt 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 
racter poems 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
uninhabited 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
injun 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
omnivore 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
on day and night (james arthur) 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
the sympathy of angels 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
a local history 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
love is a moontime teaching 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
mornings with the one glove 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
feel happier in nine seconds 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
water glass 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
african evening 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
homecoming 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
happiness is not the only happiness 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
ideal world 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
if you see it what is it you see 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
the myth of orpheus 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
the meaning of life 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
the ship 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
part of the main 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
iain lachlan campbell 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
et in arcadia ego 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
the fifth season 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
funny 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
victoria soto 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
harvest moon lantern festival 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
pastorals in the atrium 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
self storage 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
repose 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
pender and hamilton 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
little voice 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
amygdala 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
anniversary 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
there must be a name for this 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
terra nova, terraformed 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
look book 
over there on the green 
lawn under a sick pine 
is the body of the bird 
his plumage blue when 
i go to look at him and 
wonder if he's dead but 
his chest sort of heaves 
so i bend down closer 
look how the breast 
of the bird splits open 
and a fist of maggots 
spills out on the grass 
a necklace of sticky 
pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
and shining in the july 
light invertebrates that 
form an anecdote before 
i go back into our clapboard 
house to look at the sears 
catalogue and dream 
i am a girl posed into 
happiness look at me 
here now in this new 
dress i've bought with my 
own money at age twenty 
in the city when the cops 
question me i flash my 
passport thinking of 
lichen inching down 
a branch of a tree over 
the town river when i was 
small and somewhere my 
birth father is drunk and 
homeless, half-mad when 
the cops ask for his name 
he'll say, december 
beauty 
beauty is my irreparable and today i became geometric. 
a faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of first principles. 
in a whiteout of atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
vein of euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
surrounded me. i genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father's jaundice, for i am a good daughter of the colony. 
the colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
i should service or else receive a lesser dessert. with my smudge 
cleanse at the ready i find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
to time, or i'm out of it, entirely. chanting hell as hair veils 
my face as if this is a western. come polygon and i circumvent 
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. holy i went, holy 
all around my head, the holy i am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. striated by the pinnacle 
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
of its gravity. you can scan the ground from overhead for death 
pits. i read this on the internet when i was dehydrated, lonely, 
and afraid. office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition's patent heart. i've gone and been abominable. 
a column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
at the edges of my system an anishinabek or indo-european 
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
space of animal magnetism. white pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. oh, inconsequent curb 
of my street i refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
charged with trafficking. still waiting to be ordained, i make 
mask of our features that are retreating. plush pockets of rust 
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. i've gone 
and got a blister. that summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
porch. a half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. so i continue 
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where i am only just alive. 
bozo, today is over. 
a wake 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
i've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
your eyes open the night's slow static. at a loss 
to understand all that i cannot say, as if you came 
upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
if i moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
will return to me what i lost learning to speak. 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
as long as you hold me i am doubled from without and within: 
a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
i will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once i see 
your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
broken on a shore of cedar. we twist in a wake of fog. 
self-portrait cemetery 
there was no precedent 
just a headache, despair, three 
cans of asahi plastic-bagged and 
there they were: 
most punched into the earth like 
square stud earrings, 
the rest pushed out, erect, 
fake flowers at their base the most 
colourful pubic hair. 
one grave said lagos, nigeria so i stood 
by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
of my hand. 
i was the only live body around. 
they moved my friends 
into the chicken coop. 
and where are the chickens? 
i wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
and i wished for the donkeys— 
i wished something very large for the donkeys. 
i am a donkey. 
there was ginger ale, coke zero, 
and mexican beer 
on the small cart of the small donkey. 
the large and 
heavy head of a 
donkey 
covered in several burlap sacks. 
nausicaa 
she remembers only her dreaming. refashions herself 
in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
changed and replaced it before she woke. i, too, am at 
her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
part of the dream. she cannot see me lying waterlogged 
on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
walks by. it doesn't matter what i am. there is a certain 
pleasure in that. 
killarnoe 
killarnoe is a place i invented right 
now. i just built it from my head. i started 
with a letter k and set down the letters 
that spilled out. what does that say when k-i-l-l 
first sprouts? something repressed, or 
an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
free reign, opens to its own mind 
and speaks bluntly? but see how i persisted 
past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
and a silent e watching without judgement. 
killarnoe, i decide, is the land 
of our ancient people. 
ah 
an open moment, 
a prolonging 
of notice 
without reaction, a downward 
fountain of data, filling. 
unclosing, throat's 
wholeness, wide, 
to swallow 
the thrall of all of it: 
full bulge of gulp 
held— 
nothing undulating, no 
void vacuum 
pursuing a present cud 
through 
a human tunnel. 
sustained hum, 
sustenance 
pouring, not pulsing. 
rinse without erosion, 
flush without the closed 
push of peristalsis. 
clarity 
not needing blur 
to know itself. 
armadillo 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
i am in love with your brother 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
the masturbating flowers 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
the pinata 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
the internet 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
foley artist 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
voodoo hypothesis 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
keepers of paradise 
this is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
this is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
the river that runs from eden mouth 
to rare unsweetened mouth. 
i've logged the sour dawns of all 
my quiet into this body, 
its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
and reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
in the morse events of smallest things 
in my new metropolis away. 
i am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
call me isobar. distraction in place of earth. 
call me tropical depression 
where i regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
i'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
but enough. hear morne d'or divinize her song. 
give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom. 
don draper 
moths feather your far gazebo 
like young sailors on first leave. 
you know something, and keep reminding me 
of my own needs. you see an audience 
of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
and act accordingly. the swallows see it at five o'clock, 
a wolfman's tragedy. 
they hang themselves upside down, 
handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
swayed by a summer night, i swing out 
to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
a bird about-face. you're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 
poseurs 
the walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
moths, with brown wings the prize of 
asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
that peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
would come down from the morello cherry long after sunset; 
after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
for some caliph's odalisque 
or the low-stress oregonian monkey puzzles, 
a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
propose new kinds of orgasm. 
walking stick insects 
were squibs from the natural world, 
little stand-up comics 
fashioned after mutineered twigs. given half a chance, 
the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
wordsworth or nietzsche. like the wives of 17th century 
men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
dividing their time between joy and sloth. 
stranger 
a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
in their party dresses, all yelling, "don't run! don't run!" 
laughing and looking like they were having 
the time of their lives. i noticed one girl 
near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
for no other reason than itself. lost now too, 
sitting in 14b in pashmina and dark glasses, 
i might as well be the smyrna merchant. 
i've never been good at small talk; 
besides which, we'll be in new york in about an hour. 
later that night, i remembered the way she laughed 
as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
was the first thing i saw when i woke. it seems now 
she'd shown me what had come to me once 
and was now gone. travelling from montréal over a month ago, 
i can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
they didn't admit the syrian poet scheduled 
to lecture at nyu two days before. i small-talked 
the homeland security officer about his upcoming trip 
to guelph, ontario, where his wife's from. 
love, another poet once claimed, 
could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
what's been lost, and what i understood was 
that the vase, if put back together, 
becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
we might lose again, and so we do. 
i don't stick to the facts— 
what if i wrote lines that took nothing 
but the shape of my thoughts? 
no irritable reaching for an old story, 
no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
a rail bridge connects the old playground 
to the abandoned car lot—i say that knowing 
i don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
is that poetic license? it's not something i need to know, 
this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
the sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the hudson. 
they call it stranger's weather. 
i rather think i did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
i asked too—not about a better view; 
about someone entirely different, about what remains 
after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel. 
appetites 
you wake hearing the girl next door come in at two a.m. 
in the event that it's a ghost, it's telling you 
not to waste time in bed 
worrying. 
you should be sleeping, or doing 
anything else. 
you haven't yet seen the faun, the red fox, 
or the rabbit. 
the statue of a woman in the lily-padded lake is waist-deep, 
a mimicry of diana's animal life, suspicious of sleep. 
with her in mind, you're troubled even thinking of things 
that don't frighten you. 
but this, too, is a waste of time and talent. 
there is good slumber 
to be sought in the rush of ruminations outside yourself: 
in listlessness of reeds on the dead embankment, 
in languor of bee by a late marigold 
or duck feathers gathering in a corner of falling 
water. 
you realize you haven't organized your life. 
you've forgotten yourself entirely. 
you wake up and try to pick up the thread. 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
mouth open, she looked as though she was protesting 
her inclusion. i brought her to a place 
where no one speaks. there's been a mistake, 
she said with the soft folds 
of her tracksuit, the car keys 
she held like a set of brass knuckles. 
you can't take me anywhere i don't wish to go. 
i did have to drive out of town to take this picture. 
as evidence, it was the next day's news. 
now it's so obvious, her clavicle's hard line, 
the shadow there, a hollow big enough for two thumbs. 
skipping stones 
i fling flat stones into the surf, corral 
my anger in the strangely angled pose. 
each beat's concentric blip a sound so odd 
it clarifies the brine to mellow blues. 
my mother's ex once skimmed his bottle caps 
down at the lake; not littering, i thought, 
the glinting disc's fourteen discrete hop-hops. 
now i trust black, the solid strength of rock. 
my hand must learn the pebble's weight, and know 
which chips will change the shape and spoil the trick; 
this can't be accurately guessed, and though 
some seem to work without my gauging it; 
i fling them to new ocean bottom homes, 
and some i leave to dry upon the beach. skip stones. 
party music 
in '68 a great conductor came 
to one small european town. his flat 
was right above our gran's. he reeked of fame, 
wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
a coat in astrakhan. a man like that 
deserved the name of meister. appetite 
for drama and excitement won at last; 
we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
the aura of an enigmatic past 
(unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
of swissness. we could only speculate; 
he was a mighty river with no source. 
but we had watched him leave the building late: 
a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
had scooped him up, a russian at his side. 
an undernourished blonde in mink. of course. 
what more could any human being provide? 
we had it figured out. we knew this man 
was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
salvation for the suffering of gran, 
whose patience was as solid as the stones 
on via maestra. so we made a plan, 
imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
notified (a buzz between two phones), 
down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
although our minds had not digested sex, 
we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
he'd ring the bell, come in for tea. the next 
instalment of our hot imaginings: 
her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
(insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
his man-purse chucked aside! like mighty wings 
those sideburns swooped on in. oh, great abyss 
she toppled into, blown by some gust 
of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
all this for romance in the upper crust, 
a man above domestic life's dull take, 
a mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
party member, the phrase of cold 
and adult truth was just one part left out 
of what the two of us were later told. 
it wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
for party used to mean the happy mess, 
the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
but now we heard the coda of distress: 
the rattle of a door against a chair, 
the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
no nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
the strains of the horst wessel lied instead. 
because, of course, the party wasn't ours. 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
they all had names like jennifer or lynne 
or katherine; they all had bone-blonde hair, 
that wet, flat cut with bangs. they pulled your chair 
from underneath you, shoved their small fists in 
your face. too soon, you knew it would begin, 
those minkish teeth like shrapnel in the air, 
the bacchic taunts, the herculean dare, 
their soccer cleats against your porcine shin, 
that laugh, which sounded like a hundred birds 
escaping from a gunshot through the reeds— 
and now you have to face it all again: 
the joyful freckled faces lost for words 
in supermarkets, as those red hands squeeze 
your own. it's been so long! they say. amen. 
radio 
the kitchen dark, the summer night air warm, 
and my father at the kitchen table, radio 
turned down low, alone, listening to baseball. 
my mother and i come inside from our swim, 
toweling off. the crowd is restless. long silences 
between pitches in the play-by-play. 
look how he holds the radio in both hands 
like a steering wheel, thumb on the tuning dial 
to catch the wavering channel, fighting static. 
his eyes glitter like a field of fireflies. 
prague 
someone had left a mannequin in the street. 
it was wearing a wedding dress 
and—but no, 
it was a woman, standing on a box. 
a small crowd had gathered around her 
and her eyes were closed. 
i hesitated. then 
reached down to the jar at her feet 
as if i were bending to pet a stranger's dog. 
and as though i had deposited a soul, chink, 
her eyelids fluttered open, 
her fingers flickered, 
she awoke like hermione 
astonishing her husband 
in the miraculous final scene of the winter's tale. 
later, through the window of a restaurant, 
i saw her dash across a crowded street, 
clutching her skirts to keep them from the rain. 
redbird 
it's the middle of the night. 
i've set the house on fire 
with those matches i love, 
the ones in the kitchen 
with the red bird on the box. 
you can strike them anywhere. 
allumettes qui s'allument partout. 
take care: may ignite if box is 
dropped, shaken, or crushed. 
this same bird flies through 
a tattoo on your arm. 
the house is burning down 
and i am thinking of boats. 
you hate the matches, the smell 
of bent, black spoons. 
i light one and it falls to the floor. 
another and another. take care. 
i don't know what to save 
from this place, sailing from wall 
to wall, room to room, smoking. 
you are not here. you are rain 
battering against some window. 
i don't know what to save. 
the red bird eats everything in sight. 
snake handler 
no tricks, 
i just love them 
as my own blood 
and keep my eyes 
on the ceiling. 
o brothers, i sing, 
your bodies are thick 
as wrists, your skins 
my only book. 
i relieve them 
of poison, 
i undo what they do. 
i'm charcoal and paper. 
touch me: i leave 
a mark on your hand. 
this is just costume, 
my depression dress, 
my buckled shoe. 
tin flowers in my ears 
play spiral-groove blues. 
song of the last shaker 
one line, 
two line, 
three line, 
plane. 
i skate across the lake on a bone-made blade. 
my spine is an arrow, a leg of his chair. 
my nose straight and narrow and long 
as my hair. 
my body's for bruising. 
my heart is her sky. 
i train my breath 
upwards. 
i practice. 
i die. 
the trouble with wormholes 
how many times must i learn the lesson of compression? 
let go of everything you know and start from scratch. 
one friend performing backbends on a beach while another 
snaps his tibia on an icy patch of saskatchewan. i don't think 
i'm suffering, my days a series of unexpected gifts punctuated 
by a blast of the family rage shot deep into my soft plexus. 
it occurs to me i don't have to be so many people. if you're staying 
alive spinning stories, it's suddenly a skill that you talk too much. 
i'm not sure it's smart to unlock the portal. the reformed raver 
claimed he saw my inner wheels spin. red cloud, are there wars 
where you are? your great-great-grandson appeared on democracy 
now! with a plan. will my generation be remembered for anything 
i haven't forgotten? they mine the hills for gold, they mine the hills 
for uranium, and all around the world, columns are cracking. 
i've watched you soar all day. please teach me how you do that. 
elsewhere, sea lizards— 
congregated so there is not room 
to step, with tails laid criss-cross, alligator-style, among 
birds toddling in and out—are innocent of whom 
they neighbor. bird-reptile social life is pleasing. the tuatera 
will tolerate a 
petrel in its den, and lays ten eggs 
or nine—the number laid by dragons since "a true dragon 
has nine sons." the frilled lizard, the kind with no legs, 
and the three-horned chameleon, are non-serious ones that take to flight 
if you do not. in 
copenhagen the principal door 
of the bourse is roofed by two pairs of dragons standing on 
their heads—twirled by the architect—so that the four 
green tails conspiring upright, symbolize four-fold security. now, 
we cannot act until we have all the facts. 
we will never have all the facts. we act. 
we expand the wall. we found others. 
they are living breathing streets, walls 
are. this fact arouses us to erect wall 
after wall. we think only of the walls. 
we think of the walls as stitches 
in a blown apart body. the stitches 
bring this body back together. the walls, 
embracing the globe, will do the same 
for us. if not, we will work until every 
body is walled off from every other 
body. think of the thrill we'll feel 
when we tear down those walls, excited 
by the sudden wall of bodies or the joy 
of building all those walls anew. 
emerges daintily, the skunk— 
don’t laugh—in sylvan black and white chipmunk 
regalia. the inky thing 
adaptively whited with glistening 
goat-fur, is wood-warden. in his 
ermined well-cuttlefish-inked wool, he is 
determination’s totem. outlawed? 
his sweet face and powerful feet go about 
in chieftain’s coat of chilcat cloth. 
he is his own protection from the moth, 
noble little warrior. that 
otter-skin on it, the living pole-cat, 
smothers anything that stings. well,— 
this same weasel’s playful and his weasel 
associates are too. only 
wood-weasels shall associate with me. 
into the chicken coop. 
and where are the chickens? 
i wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
and i wished for the donkeys— 
i wished something very large for the donkeys. 
i am a donkey. 
there was ginger ale, coke zero, 
and mexican beer 
on the small cart of the small donkey. 
the large and 
heavy head of a 
donkey 
covered in several burlap sacks. 
those 
various sounds consistently indistinct, like intermingled echoes 
struck from thin glasses successively at random—the 
inflection disguised: your hair, the tails of two fighting-cocks head to head in stone—like sculptured scimitars re- 
peating the curve of your ears in reverse order: your eyes, flowers of ice 
and 
snow sown by tearing winds on the cordage of disabled ships: your raised hand 
an ambiguous signature: your cheeks, those rosettes 
of blood on the stone floors of french châteaux, with regard to which the guides are so affirmative: 
your other hand 
a 
bundle of lances all alike, partly hid by emeralds from persia 
and the fractional magnificence of florentine 
goldwork—a collection of half a dozen little objects made fine 
with enamel in gray, yellow, and dragon fly blue; a lemon, a 
pear 
and three bunches of grapes, tied with silver: your dress, a magnificent square 
cathedral of uniform 
and at the same time, diverse appearance—a species of vertical vineyard rustling in the storm 
of conventional opinion. are they weapons or scalpels? whetted 
to 
brilliance by the hard majesty of that sophistication which is su- 
perior to opportunity, these things are rich 
instruments with which to experiment but surgery is not tentative. why dissect destiny with instruments which 
are more highly specialized than the tissues of destiny itself? 
new york 
the savage’s romance, 
accreted where we need the space for commerce— 
the center of the wholesale fur trade, 
starred with tepees of ermine and peopled with foxes, 
the long guard-hairs waving two inches beyond the body of the pelt; 
the ground dotted with deer-skins—white with white spots 
"as satin needlework in a single color may carry a varied pattern," 
and wilting eagles’ down compacted by the wind; 
and picardels of beaver skin; white ones alert with snow. 
it is a far cry from the "queen full of jewels" 
and the beau with the muff, 
from the gilt coach shaped like a perfume bottle, 
to the conjunction of the monongahela and the allegheny, 
and the scholastic philosophy of the wilderness 
to combat which one must stand outside and laugh 
since to go in is to be lost. 
it is not the dime-novel exterior, 
niagara falls, the calico horses and the war canoe; 
it is not that "if the fur is not finer than such as one sees others wear, 
one would rather be without it—" 
that estimated in raw meat and berries, we could feed the universe; 
it is not the atmosphere of ingenuity, 
the otter, the beaver, the puma skins 
without shooting-irons or dogs; 
it is not the plunder, 
it is the "accessibility to experience. 
people’s surroundings 
they answer one’s questions: 
a deal table compact with the wall; 
in this dried bone of arrangement, 
one’s "natural promptness" is compressed, not crowded out; 
one’s style is not lost in such simplicity: 
the palace furniture, so old fashioned, so old fashionable; 
sèvres china and the fireplace dogs— 
bronze dromios with pointed ears, as obsolete as pugs; 
one has one’s preference in the matter of bad furniture 
and this is not one’s choice: 
the vast indestructible necropolis 
of composite yawman-erbe separable units; 
the steel, the oak, the glass, the poor richard publications 
containing the public secrets of efficiency 
on "paper so thin that one thousand four hundred and twenty pages make one inch," 
exclaiming so to speak, when you take my time, you take something i had meant to use: 
the highway hid by fir trees in rhododendron twenty feet deep, 
the peacocks, hand-forged gates, old persian velvet— 
roses outlined in pale black on an ivory ground— 
the pierced iron shadows of the cedars, 
chinese carved glass, old waterford, 
lettered ladies; landscape gardening twisted into permanence: 
straight lines over such great distances as one finds in utah or in texas 
where people do not have to be told 
that "a good brake is as important as a good motor," 
where by means of extra sense cells in the skin, 
they can like trout, smell what is coming— 
those cool sirs with the explicit sensory apparatus of common sense, 
who know the exact distance between two points as the crow flies; 
there is something attractive about a mind that moves in a straight line— 
the municipal bat-roost of mosquito warfare, concrete statuary, 
medicaments for "instant beauty" in the hands of all, 
and that live wire, the american string quartet: 
and bluebeard’s tower above the coral reefs, 
the magic mousetrap closing on all points of the compass, 
capping like petrified surf, the furious azure of the bay 
where there is no dust and life is like a lemon-leaf, 
a green piece of tough translucent parchment, 
where the crimson, the copper, and the chinese vermilion of the poincianas 
set fire to the masonry and turquoise blues refute the clock; 
this dungeon with odd notions of hospitality, 
with its "chessmen carved out of moonstones," 
its mocking-birds, fringed lilies, and hibiscus, 
its black butterflies with blue half circles on their wings, 
tan goats with onyx ears, its lizards glittering and without thickness 
like splashes of fire and silver on the pierced turquoise of the lattices 
and the acacia-like lady shivering at the touch of a hand, 
lost in a small collision of the orchids— 
dyed quicksilver let fall 
to disappear like an obedient chameleon in fifty shades of mauve and amethyst: 
here where the mind of this establishment has come to the conclusion 
that it would be impossible to revolve about one’s self too much, 
sophistication has like "an escalator, cut the nerve of progress." 
in these noncommittal, personal-impersonal expressions of appearance, 
the eye knows what to skip; 
the physiognomy of conduct must not reveal the skeleton; 
"a setting must not have the air of being one" 
yet with x-raylike inquisitive intensity upon it, the surfaces go back; 
the interfering fringes of expression are but a stain on what stands out, 
there is neither up nor down to it; 
we see the exterior and the fundamental structure— 
captains of armies, cooks, carpenters, 
cutlers, gamesters, surgeons and armorers, 
lapidaries, silkmen, glovers, fiddlers and ballad-singers, 
sextons of churches, dyers of black cloth, hostlers and chimney-sweeps, 
queens, countesses, ladies, emperors, travelers and mariners, 
dukes, princes and gentlemen 
in their respective places— 
camps, forges and battlefields, 
conventions, oratories and wardrobes, 
dens, deserts, railway stations, asylums and places where engines are made, 
shops, prisons, brickyards and altars of churches— 
in magnificent places clean and decent, 
castles, palaces, dining-halls, theatres and imperial audience-chambers. 
snakes, mongooses, snake-charmers, and the like 
i have a friend who would give a price for those long fingers all of one length— 
those hideous bird’s claws, for that exotic asp and the mongoose— 
products of the country in which everything is hard work, the country of the grass-getter, 
the torch-bearer, the dog-servant, the message-bearer, the holy-man. 
engrossed in this distinguished worm nearly as wild and as fierce as the day it was captured, 
he gazes as if incapable of looking at anything with a view to analysis. 
"the slight snake rippling quickly through the grass, 
the leisurely tortoise with its pied back, 
the chameleon passing from twig to stone, from stone to straw," 
lit his imagination at one time; his admiration now converges upon this: 
thick, not heavy, it stands up from its traveling-basket, 
the essentially greek, the plastic animal, all of a piece from nose to tail; 
one is compelled to look at it as at the shadows of the alps 
imprisoning in their folds like flies in amber, the rhythms of the skating-rink. 
this animal to which from the earliest times, importance has attached, 
fine as its worshippers have said—for what was it invented? 
to show that when intelligence in its pure form 
has embarked on a train of thought which is unproductive, it will come back? 
we do not know; the only positive thing about it is its shape, but why protest? 
the passion for setting people right is in itself an afflictive disease. 
distaste which takes no credit to itself is best. 
bowls 
on the green 
with lignum vitae balls and ivory markers, 
the pins planted in wild duck formation, 
and quickly dispersed: 
by this survival of ancient punctilio 
in the manner of chinese lacquer carving, 
layer after layer exposed by certainty of touch and unhurried incision 
so that only so much color shall be revealed as is necessary to the picture 
i learn that we are precisians— 
not citizens of pompeii arrested in action 
as a cross section of one’s correspondence would seem to imply. 
renouncing a policy of boorish indifference 
to everything that has been said since the days of matilda, 
i shall purchase an etymological dictionary of modern english 
that i may understand what is written 
and like the ant and the spider 
returning from time to time to headquarters, 
shall answer the question 
as to "why i like winter better than i like summer" 
and acknowledge that it does not make me sick 
to look modern playwrights and poets and novelists straight in the face— 
that i feel just the same; 
and i shall write to the publisher of the magazine 
which will "appear the first day of the month 
and disappear before one has had time to buy it 
unless one takes proper precaution," 
and make an effort to please— 
since he who gives quickly gives twice 
in nothing so much as in a letter. 
novices 
anatomize their work 
in the sense in which will honeycomb was jilted by a duchess, 
the little assumptions of the scared ego confusing the issue 
so that they do not know "whether it is the buyer or the seller who gives the money"— 
an abstruse idea plain to none but the artist, 
the only seller who buys, and holds on to the money. 
because one expresses oneself and entitles it wisdom, one is not a fool. what an idea! 
"dracontine cockatrices, perfect and poisonous from the beginning," 
they present themselves as a contrast to sea-serpented regions "unlit by the half-lights of more conscious art." 
acquiring at thirty what at sixty they will be trying to forget, 
blind to the right word, deaf to satire 
which like "the smell of the cypress strengthens the nerves of the brain," 
averse from the antique 
with "that tinge of sadness about it which a reflective mind always feels, 
it is so little and so much"— 
they write the sort of thing that would in their judgment interest a lady; 
curious to know if we do not adore each letter of the alphabet that goes to make a word of it— 
according to the act of congress, the sworn statement of the treasurer and all the rest of it— 
the counterpart to what we are: 
stupid man; men are strong and no one pays any attention: 
stupid woman; women have charm and how annoying they can be. 
yes, "the authors are wonderful people, particularly those that write the most," 
the masters of all languages, the supertadpoles of expression. 
accustomed to the recurring phosphorescence of antiquity, 
the "much noble vagueness and indefinite jargon" of plato, 
the lucid movements of the royal yacht upon the learned scenery of egypt— 
king, steward, and harper seated amidships while the jade and the rock crystal course about in solution, 
their suavity surmounts the surf— 
the willowy wit, the transparent equation of isaiah, jeremiah, ezekiel, daniel. 
bored by "the detailless perspective of the sea," reiterative and naive, 
and its chaos of rocks—the stuffy remarks of the hebrews— 
the good and alive young men demonstrate the assertion 
that it is not necessary to be associated with that which has bored one; 
they have never made a statement which they found so easy to prove— 
"split like a glass against a wall" 
in this "precipitate of dazzling impressions, 
the spontaneous unforced passion of the hebrew language— 
an abyss of verbs full of reverberations and tempestuous energy," 
in which action perpetuates action and angle is at variance with angle 
till submerged by the general action; 
obscured by "fathomless suggestions of color," 
by incessantly panting lines of green, white with concussion, 
in this drama of water against rocks—this "ocean of hurrying consonants" 
with its "great livid stains like long slabs of green marble," 
its "flashing lances of perpendicular lightning" and "molten fires swallowed up," 
"with foam on its barriers," 
"crashing itself out in one long hiss of spray. 
marriage 
this institution, 
perhaps one should say enterprise 
out of respect for which 
one says one need not change one’s mind 
about a thing one has believed in, 
requiring public promises 
of one’s intention 
to fulfill a private obligation: 
i wonder what adam and eve 
think of it by this time, 
this firegilt steel 
alive with goldenness; 
how bright it shows— 
"of circular traditions and impostures, 
committing many spoils," 
requiring all one’s criminal ingenuity 
to avoid! 
psychology which explains everything 
explains nothing 
and we are still in doubt. 
eve: beautiful woman— 
i have seen her 
when she was so handsome 
she gave me a start, 
able to write simultaneously 
in three languages— 
english, german and french 
and talk in the meantime; 
equally positive in demanding a commotion 
and in stipulating quiet: 
"i should like to be alone"; 
to which the visitor replies, 
"i should like to be alone; 
why not be alone together?" 
below the incandescent stars 
below the incandescent fruit, 
the strange experience of beauty; 
its existence is too much; 
it tears one to pieces 
and each fresh wave of consciousness 
is poison. 
"see her, see her in this common world," 
the central flaw 
in that first crystal-fine experiment, 
this amalgamation which can never be more 
than an interesting impossibility, 
describing it 
as "that strange paradise 
unlike flesh, gold, or stately buildings, 
the choicest piece of my life: 
the heart rising 
in its estate of peace 
as a boat rises 
with the rising of the water"; 
constrained in speaking of the serpent— 
that shed snakeskin in the history of politeness 
not to be returned to again— 
that invaluable accident 
exonerating adam. 
and he has beauty also; 
it’s distressing—the o thou 
to whom, from whom, 
without whom nothing—adam; 
"something feline, 
something colubrine"—how true! 
a crouching mythological monster 
in that persian miniature of emerald mines, 
raw silk—ivory white, snow white, 
oyster white and six others— 
that paddock full of leopards and giraffes— 
long lemon-yellow bodies 
sown with trapezoids of blue. 
alive with words, 
vibrating like a cymbal 
touched before it has been struck, 
he has prophesied correctly— 
the industrious waterfall, 
"the speedy stream 
which violently bears all before it, 
at one time silent as the air 
and now as powerful as the wind." 
"treading chasms 
on the uncertain footing of a spear," 
forgetting that there is in woman 
a quality of mind 
which as an instinctive manifestation 
is unsafe, 
he goes on speaking 
in a formal, customary strain 
of "past states, the present state, 
seals, promises, 
the evil one suffered, 
the good one enjoys, 
hell, heaven, 
everything convenient 
to promote one’s joy." 
there is in him a state of mind 
by force of which, 
perceiving what it was not 
intended that he should, 
"he experiences a solemn joy 
in seeing that he has become an idol." 
plagued by the nightingale 
in the new leaves, 
with its silence— 
not its silence but its silences, 
he says of it: 
"it clothes me with a shirt of fire." 
"he dares not clap his hands 
to make it go on 
lest it should fly off; 
if he does nothing, it will sleep; 
if he cries out, it will not understand." 
unnerved by the nightingale 
and dazzled by the apple, 
impelled by "the illusion of a fire 
effectual to extinguish fire," 
compared with which 
the shining of the earth 
is but deformity—a fire 
"as high as deep as bright as broad 
as long as life itself," 
he stumbles over marriage, 
"a very trivial object indeed" 
to have destroyed the attitude 
in which he stood— 
the ease of the philosopher 
unfathered by a woman. 
unhelpful hymen! 
"a kind of overgrown cupid" 
reduced to insignificance 
by the mechanical advertising 
parading as involuntary comment, 
by that experiment of adam’s 
with ways out but no way in— 
the ritual of marriage, 
augmenting all its lavishness; 
its fiddle-head ferns, 
lotus flowers, opuntias, white dromedaries, 
its hippopotamus— 
nose and mouth combined 
in one magnificent hopper, 
"the crested screamer— 
that huge bird almost a lizard," 
its snake and the potent apple. 
he tells us 
that "for love 
that will gaze an eagle blind, 
that is like a hercules 
climbing the trees 
in the garden of the hesperides, 
from forty-five to seventy 
is the best age," 
commending it 
as a fine art, as an experiment, 
a duty or as merely recreation. 
one must not call him ruffian 
nor friction a calamity— 
the fight to be affectionate: 
"no truth can be fully known 
until it has been tried 
by the tooth of disputation." 
the blue panther with black eyes, 
the basalt panther with blue eyes, 
entirely graceful— 
one must give them the path— 
the black obsidian diana 
who "darkeneth her countenance 
as a bear doth, 
causing her husband to sigh," 
the spiked hand 
that has an affection for one 
and proves it to the bone, 
impatient to assure you 
that impatience is the mark of independence 
not of bondage. 
"married people often look that way"— 
"seldom and cold, up and down, 
mixed and malarial 
with a good day and bad." 
"when do we feed?" 
we occidentals are so unemotional, 
we quarrel as we feed; 
one’s self quite lost, 
the irony preserved 
in "the ahasuerus tête à tête banquet" 
with its "good monster, lead the way," 
with little laughter 
and munificence of humor 
in that quixotic atmosphere of frankness 
in which "four o’clock does not exist 
but at five o’clock 
the ladies in their imperious humility 
are ready to receive you"; 
in which experience attests 
that men have power 
and sometimes one is made to feel it. 
he says, "what monarch would not blush 
to have a wife 
with hair like a shaving-brush? 
the fact of woman 
is not ‘the sound of the flute 
but very poison." 
she says, "‘men are monopolists 
of stars, garters, buttons 
and other shining baubles’— 
unfit to be the guardians 
of another person’s happiness." 
he says, "these mummies 
must be handled carefully— 
‘the crumbs from a lion’s meal, 
a couple of shins and the bit of an ear’; 
turn to the letter m 
and you will find 
that ‘a wife is a coffin,’ 
that severe object 
with the pleasing geometry 
stipulating space and not people, 
refusing to be buried 
and uniquely disappointing, 
revengefully wrought in the attitude 
of an adoring child 
to a distinguished parent." 
she says, "this butterfly, 
this waterfly, this nomad 
that has ‘proposed 
to settle on my hand for life.’— 
what can one do with it? 
there must have been more time 
in shakespeare’s day 
to sit and watch a play. 
you know so many artists who are fools." 
he says, "you know so many fools 
who are not artists." 
the fact forgot 
that "some have merely rights 
while some have obligations," 
he loves himself so much, 
he can permit himself 
no rival in that love. 
she loves herself so much, 
she cannot see herself enough— 
a statuette of ivory on ivory, 
the logical last touch 
to an expansive splendor 
earned as wages for work done: 
one is not rich but poor 
when one can always seem so right. 
what can one do for them— 
these savages 
condemned to disaffect 
all those who are not visionaries 
alert to undertake the silly task 
of making people noble? 
this model of petrine fidelity 
who "leaves her peaceful husband 
only because she has seen enough of him"– 
that orator reminding you, 
"i am yours to command." 
"everything to do with love is mystery; 
it is more than a day’s work 
to investigate this science." 
one sees that it is rare— 
that striking grasp of opposites 
opposed each to the other, not to unity, 
which in cycloid inclusiveness 
has dwarfed the demonstration 
of columbus with the egg— 
a triumph of simplicity— 
that charitive euroclydon 
of frightening disinterestedness 
which the world hates, 
admitting: 
"i am such a cow, 
if i had a sorrow, 
i should feel it a long time; 
i am not one of those 
who have a great sorrow 
in the morning 
and a great joy at noon"; 
which says: "i have encountered it 
among those unpretentious 
protegés of wisdom, 
where seeming to parade 
as the debater and the roman, 
the statesmanship 
of an archaic daniel webster 
persists to their simplicity of temper 
as the essence of the matter: 
‘liberty and union 
now and forever’; 
the book on the writing-table; 
the hand in the breast-pocket. 
silence 
my father used to say, 
"superior people never make long visits, 
have to be shown longfellow’s grave 
nor the glass flowers at harvard. 
self reliant like the cat— 
that takes its prey to privacy, 
the mouse’s limp tail hanging like a shoelace from its mouth— 
they sometimes enjoy solitude, 
and can be robbed of speech 
by speech which has delighted them. 
the deepest feeling always shows itself in silence; 
not in silence, but restraint." 
nor was he insincere in saying, "‘make my house your inn.’" 
inns are not residences. 
an octopus 
of ice. deceptively reserved and flat, 
it lies "in grandeur and in mass" 
beneath a sea of shifting snow dunes; 
dots of cyclamen red and maroon on its clearly defined pseudopodia 
made of glass that will bend—a much needed invention— 
comprising twenty-eight ice fields from fifty to five hundred feet thick, 
of unimagined delicacy. 
"picking periwinkles from the cracks" 
or killing prey with the concentric crushing rigor of the python, 
it hovers forward "spider fashion 
on its arms" misleadingly like lace; 
its "ghostly pallor changing 
to the green metallic tinge of an anemone starred pool." 
the fir trees in "the magnitude of their root systems," 
rise aloof from these maneuvers "creepy to behold," 
austere specimens of our american royal families, 
"each like the shadow of the one beside it. 
the rock seems frail compared with their dark energy of life," 
its vermilion and onyx and manganese blue interior expensiveness 
left at the mercy of the weather; 
"stained transversely by iron where the water drips down," 
recognized by its plants and its animals. 
completing a circle, 
you have been deceived into thinking that you have progressed, 
under the polite needles of the larches 
"hung to filter not to intercept the sunlight"— 
met by tightly wattled spruce twigs 
"conformed to an edge like clipped cypress 
as if no branch could penetrate the cold beyond its company"; 
and dumps of gold and silver ore enclosing the goat’s mirror— 
that lady-fingerlike depression in the shape of the left human foot, 
which prejudices you in favor of itself 
before you have had time to see the others; 
its indigo, pea-green, blue-green, and turquoise, 
from a hundred to two hundred feet deep, 
"merging in irregular patches in the middle lake 
where like gusts of a storm 
obliterating the shadows of the fir trees, the wind makes lanes of ripples." 
what spot could have merits of equal importance 
for bears, elk, deer, wolves, goats, and ducks? 
preempted by their ancestors, 
this is the property of the exacting porcupine, 
and of the rat "slipping along to its burrow in the swamp 
or pausing on high ground to smell the heather"; 
of "thoughtful beavers 
making drains which seem the work of careful men with shovels," 
and of the bears inspecting unexpectedly 
ant hills and berry bushes. 
composed of calcium gems and alabaster pillars, 
topaz, tourmaline crystals and amethyst quartz, 
their den is somewhere else, concealed in the confusion 
of "blue forests thrown together with marble and jasper and agate 
as if whole quarries had been dynamited." 
and farther up, in stag-at-bay position 
as a scintillating fragment of these terrible stalagmites, 
stands the goat, 
its eye fixed on the waterfall which never seems to fall— 
an endless skein swayed by the wind, 
immune to force of gravity in the perspective of the peaks. 
a special antelope 
acclimated to "grottoes from which issue penetrating draughts 
which make you wonder why you came," 
it stands its ground 
on cliffs the color of the clouds, of petrified white vapor— 
black feet, eyes, nose, and horns engraved on dazzling ice-fields, 
the ermine body on the crystal peak; 
the sun kindling its shoulders to maximum heat like acetylene, dyeing them white— 
upon this antique pedestal— 
"a mountain with those graceful lines which prove it a volcano," 
its top a complete cone like fujiyama’s 
till an explosion blew it off. 
maintaining many minds, distinguished by a beauty 
of which "the visitor dare never fully speak at home 
for fear of being stoned as an imposter," 
big snow mountain is the home of a diversity of creatures: 
those who "have lived in hotels 
but who now live in camps—who prefer to"; 
the mountain guide evolving from the trapper, 
"in two pairs of trousers, the outer one older, 
wearing slowly away from the feet to the knees"; 
"the nine-striped chipmunk 
running with unmammallike agility along a log"; 
the water ouzel 
with "its passion for rapids and high pressured falls," 
building under the arch of some tiny niagara; 
the white-tailed ptarmigan "in winter solid white, 
feeding on heather bells and alpine buckwheat"; 
and the eleven eagles of the west, 
"fond of the spring fragrance and the winter colors," 
used to the unegoistic action of the glaciers 
and "several hours of frost every midsummer night." 
"they make a nice appearance, don’t they," 
happy seeing nothing? 
perched on treacherous lava and pumice— 
those unadjusted chimney-pots and cleavers 
which stipulate "the names and addresses of persons to notify 
in case of disaster—" 
they hear the roar of ice and supervise the water 
winding slowly through the cliffs, 
the road "climbing like the thread 
which forms the groove around a snail-shell, 
doubling back and forth until where snow begins, it ends." 
no "deliberate wide-eyed wistfulness" is here 
among the boulders sunk in ripples and white water 
where "when you hear the best wild music of the mountains it is sure to be a marmot," 
the victim on some slight observatory, 
of "a struggle between curiosity and caution," 
inquiring what has scared it: 
a stone from the moraine descending in leaps, 
another marmot, or the spotted ponies with "glass eyes," 
brought up on frosty grass and flowers 
and rapid draughts of ice water. 
instructed none knows how, to climb the mountain, 
by "business men who as totemic scenery of canada, 
require for recreation, 
three hundred and sixty-five holidays in the year," 
these conspicuously spotted little horses are peculiar; 
hard to discern among the birch trees, ferns, and lily pads, 
avalanche lilies, indian paintbrushes, 
bears’ ears and kittentails, 
and miniature cavalcades of chlorophylless fungi 
magnified in profile on the moss beds like moonstones in the water; 
the cavalcade of calico competing 
with the original american "menagerie of styles" 
among the white flowers of the rhododendron surmounting rigid leaves 
upon which moisture works its alchemy, 
transmuting verdure into onyx. 
larkspur, blue pincushions, blue peas, and lupin; 
white flowers with white, and red with red; 
the blue ones "growing close together 
so that patches of them look like blue water in the distance": 
this arrangement of colors 
as in persian designs of hard stones with enamel, 
forms a pleasing equation— 
a diamond outside and inside, a white dot; 
on the outside, a ruby; inside, a red dot; 
black spots balanced with black 
in the woodlands where fires have run over the ground— 
separated by aspens, cat’s paws, and woolly sunflowers, 
fireweed, asters, and goliath thistles 
"flowering at all altitudes as multiplicitous as barley," 
like pink sapphires in the pavement of the glistening plateau. 
inimical to "bristling, puny, swearing men 
equipped with saws and axes," 
this treacherous glass mountain 
admires gentians, lady’s slippers, harebells, mountain dryads, 
and "calypso, the goat flower— 
that greenish orchid fond of snow"— 
anomalously nourished upon shelving glacial ledges 
where climbers have not gone or have gone timidly, 
"the one resting his nerves while the other advanced," 
on this volcano with the blue jay, her principal companion. 
"hopping stiffly on sharp feet" like miniature icehacks— 
"secretive, with a look of wisdom and distinction, but a villain, 
fond of human society or the crumbs that go with it," 
he knows no greek, 
"that pride producing language," 
in which "rashness is rendered innocuous, and error exposed 
by the collision of knowledge with knowledge." 
"like happy souls in hell," enjoying mental difficulties, 
the grasshoppers of greece 
amused themselves with delicate behavior 
because it was "so noble and so fair"; 
not practiced in adapting their intelligence 
to eagle traps and snowshoes, 
to alpenstocks and other toys contrived by those 
"alive to the advantage of invigorating pleasures." 
bows, arrows, oars, and paddles for which trees provide the wood, 
in new countries are more eloquent than elsewhere— 
augmenting evidence for the assertion 
that essentially humane, 
"the forest affords wood for dwellings and by its beauty stimulates 
the moral vigor of its citizens." 
the greeks liked smoothness, distrusting what was back 
of what could not be clearly seen, 
resolving with benevolent conclusiveness, 
"complexities which still will be complexities 
as long as the world lasts"; 
ascribing what we clumsily call happiness, 
to "an accident or a quality, 
a spiritual substance or the soul itself, 
an act, a disposition, or a habit, 
or a habit infused to which the soul has been persuaded, 
or something distinct from a habit, a power—" 
such power as adam had and we are still devoid of. 
"emotionally sensitive, their hearts were hard"; 
their wisdom was remote 
from that of these odd oracles of cool official sarcasm, 
upon this game preserve 
where "guns, nets, seines, traps and explosives, 
hired vehicles, gambling and intoxicants are prohibited, 
disobedient persons being summarily removed 
and not allowed to return without permission in writing." 
it is self evident 
that it is frightful to have everything afraid of one; 
that one must do as one is told 
and eat "rice, prunes, dates, raisins, hardtack, and tomatoes" 
if one would "conquer the main peak" of mount tacoma 
this fossil flower concise without a shiver, 
intact when it is cut, 
damned for its sacrosanct remoteness— 
like henry james "damned by the public for decorum"; 
not decorum, but restraint; 
it was the love of doing hard things 
that rebuffed and wore them out—a public out of sympathy with neatness. 
neatness of finish! neatness of finish! 
relentless accuracy is the nature of this octopus 
with its capacity for fact. 
"creeping slowly as with meditated stealth, 
its arms seeming to approach from all directions," 
it receives one under winds that "tear the snow to bits 
and hurl it like a sandblast, 
shearing off twigs and loose bark from the trees." 
is tree the word for these strange things 
"flat on the ground like vines"; 
some "bent in a half circle with branches on one side 
suggesting dustbrushes, not trees; 
some finding strength in union, forming little stunted groves, 
their flattened mats of branches shrunk in trying to escape" 
from the hard mountain "planed by ice and polished by the wind"— 
the white volcano with no weather side; 
the lightning flashing at its base, 
rain falling in the valleys, and snow falling on the peak— 
the glassy octopus symmetrically pointed, 
its claw cut by the avalanche 
"with a sound like the crack of a rifle, 
in a curtain of powdered snow launched like a waterfall. 
sea unicorns and land unicorns 
with their respective lions— 
"mighty monoceroses with immeasured tayles"— 
these are those very animals 
described by the cartographers of 1539, 
defiantly revolving 
in such a way that the hard steel 
in the long keel of white exhibited in tumbling, 
disperses giant weeds 
and those sea snakes whose forms looped in the foam, "disquiet shippers." 
not ignorant of how a voyager obtained the horn of a sea unicorn 
to give queen elizabeth 
who thought it worth a hundred thousand pounds, 
they persevere in swimming where they like, 
finding the place where lions live in herds, 
strewn on the beach like stones with lesser stones— 
and bears are white; 
discovering antarctica, its penguin kings and icy spires, 
and sir john hawkins’ florida 
"abounding in land unicorns and lions, 
since where the one is, 
its arch enemy cannot be missing." 
thus personalities by nature much opposed, 
can be combined in such a way 
that when they do agree, their unanimity is great, 
"in politics, in trade, law, sport, religion, 
china collecting, tennis, and church going." 
you have remarked this fourfold combination of strange animals, 
upon embroideries, 
enwrought with "polished garlands" of agreeing indifference— 
thorns, "myrtle rods, and shafts of bay," 
"cobwebs, and knotts, and mulberries" 
of lapis lazuli and pomegranate and malachite— 
britannia’s sea unicorn with its rebellious child 
now ostentatiously indigenous of the new english coast 
and its land lion oddly tolerant of those pacific counterparts to it, 
the water lions of the west. 
this is a strange fraternity—these sea lions and land lions, 
land unicorns and sea unicorns: 
the lion civilly rampant, 
tame and concessive like the long-tailed bear of ecuador— 
the lion standing up against this screen of woven air 
which is the forest: 
the unicorn also, on its hind legs in reciprocity. 
a puzzle to the hunters, is this haughtiest of beasts, 
to be distinguished from those born without a horn, 
in use like saint jerome’s tame lion, as domestics, 
rebelling proudly at the dogs 
which are dismayed by the chain lightning 
playing at them from its horn— 
the dogs persistent in pursuit of it as if it could be caught, 
"deriving agreeable terror" from its "moonbeam throat" 
on fire like its white coat and unconsumed as if of salamander’s skin. 
so wary as to disappear for centuries and reappear, 
yet never to be caught, 
the unicorn has been preserved 
by an unmatched device 
wrought like the work of expert blacksmiths, 
with which nothing can compare— 
this animal of that one horn 
throwing itself upon which head foremost from a cliff, 
it walks away unharmed, 
proficient in this feat, which like herodotus, 
i have not seen except in pictures. 
thus this strange animal with its miraculous elusiveness, 
has come to be unique, 
"impossible to take alive," 
tamed only by a lady inoffensive like itself— 
as curiously wild and gentle; 
"as straight and slender as the crest, 
or antlet of the one-beam’d beast." 
upon the printed page, 
also by word of mouth, 
we have a record of it all 
and how, unfearful of deceit, 
etched like an equine monster on an old celestial map, 
beside a cloud or dress of virgin-mary blue, 
improved "all over slightly with snakes of venice gold, 
and silver, and some o’s," 
the unicorn "with pavon high," approaches eagerly; 
until engrossed by what appears of this strange enemy, 
upon the map, "upon her lap," 
its "mild wild head doth lie. 
the steeple-jack 
dürer would have seen a reason for living 
in a town like this, with eight stranded whales 
to look at; with the sweet sea air coming into your house 
on a fine day, from water etched 
with waves as formal as the scales 
on a fish. 
one by one, in two’s, in three’s, the seagulls keep 
flying back and forth over the town clock, 
or sailing around the lighthouse without moving the wings— 
rising steadily with a slight 
quiver of the body—or flock 
mewing where 
a sea the purple of the peacock’s neck is 
paled to greenish azure as dürer changed 
the pine green of the tyrol to peacock blue and guinea 
grey. you can see a twenty-five 
pound lobster; and fishnets arranged 
to dry. the 
whirlwind fifeanddrum of the storm bends the salt 
marsh grass, disturbs stars in the sky and the 
star on the steeple; it is a privilege to see so 
much confusion. disguised by what 
might seem austerity, the seaside 
flowers and 
trees are favored by the fog so that you have 
the tropics at first hand: the trumpet-vine, 
fox-glove, giant snap-dragon, a salpiglossis that has 
spots and stripes; morning-glories, gourds, 
or moon-vines trained on fishing-twine 
at the back 
door; cat-tails, flags, blueberries and spiderwort, 
striped grass, lichens, sunflowers, asters, daisies— 
the yellow and the crab-claw blue ones with green bracts—toad-plant, 
petunias, ferns; pink lilies, blue 
ones, tigers; poppies; black sweet-peas. 
the climate 
is not right for the banyan, frangipani, the 
jack-fruit tree; nor for exotic serpent 
life. ring lizard and snake-skin for the foot if you see fit, 
but here they’ve cats not cobras to 
keep down the rats. the diffident 
little newt 
with white pin-dots on black horizontal spaced 
out bands lives here; yet there is nothing that 
ambition can buy or take away. the college student 
named ambrose sits on the hill-side 
with his not-native books and hat 
and sees boats 
at sea progress white and rigid as if in 
a groove. liking an elegance of which 
the source is not bravado, he knows by heart the antique 
sugar-bowl shaped summer-house of 
interlacing slats, and the pitch 
of the church 
spire, not true, from which a man in scarlet lets 
down a rope as a spider spins a thread; 
he might be part of a novel, but on the sidewalk a 
sign says c. j. poole, steeple-jack, 
in black and white; and one in red 
and white says 
danger. the church portico has four fluted 
columns, each a single piece of stone, made 
modester by white-wash. this would be a fit haven for 
waifs, children, animals, prisoners, 
and presidents who have repaid 
sin-driven 
senators by not thinking about them. there 
are a school-house, a post-office in a 
store, fish-houses, hen-houses, a three-masted schooner on 
the stocks. the hero, the student, 
the steeple-jack, each in his way, 
is at home. 
it could not be dangerous to be living 
in a town like this, of simple people, 
who have a steeple-jack placing danger signs by the church 
while he is gilding the solidpointed 
star, which on a steeple 
stands for hope. 
the student 
in america everybody must have a degree," the french man 
says, "but the french do not think that all can have it; they don’t 
say everyone must go to college." we 
may feel as he says we do; five kinds of superiority 
might be unattainable by all, but one degree is not too much. 
in each school there is a pair of fruit-trees like that twin tree 
in every other school: tree-of-knowledge— 
tree-of-life—each with a label like that of the other college: 
lux, or lux et veritas, christo et ecclesiae, sapiet 
felici, and if science confers immortality, 
these apple-trees should be for everyone. 
oriental arbor vitae we say lightly. yet you pardon 
it as when one thinking of the navy does not know not to infer 
dishonorable discharge from a d. d. it is a 
thoughtful pupil has two thoughts for the word 
valet; or for bachelor, child, damsel; though no one having heard 
them used as terms of chivalry would make the medieval use of 
them. secluded from domestic strife, jack bookworm led a 
college life says goldsmith. he might not say 
it of the student who shows interest in the stranger’s resumé 
by asking "when will your experiment be finished, doctor einstein?" 
and is pleased when doctor einstein smiles and says politely 
"science is never finished." but we’re not 
hypocrites, we’re rustics. the football huddle in the vacant lot 
is impersonating calculus and physics and military 
books; and is gathering the data for genetics. if 
scholarship would profit by it, sixteenfoot 
men should be grown; it’s for the football men to say. we must lean 
on their experience. there is vitality in the world of sport. 
if it is not the tree of knowledge, it’s the tree of life. 
when audubon adopted us he taught 
us how to dance. it was the great crab-flounder of montana caught 
and changed from that which creeps to that which is angelic. he taught us how 
to turn as the airport wind-sock turns without an error; 
like alligator, downpour, dynamite, 
and wotan, gliding round the course in a fast neat school, with the white 
of the eye showing; or as sea-lions keep going round and round the 
pool. but there is more to learn—the difference between cow 
and zebu; lion, tiger; barred and brown 
owls; horned owls have one ear that opens up and one that opens down. 
the golden eagle is the one with feathered legs. the penguin wing is 
ancient, not degenerate. swordfish are different from 
gars, if one may speak of gars when the big 
gamehunters are using the fastidious singular—say pig, 
and that they have seen camelsparrow, tigerhorse, rat, mouse, butterfly, 
snake, elephant, fruit-bat, et cet’ra. no fact of science— 
theology or biology—might 
not as well be known; one does not care to hold opinions that fright 
could dislocate. education augments our natural forces and 
prompts us to extend the machinery of advantage 
to those who are without it. one fitted 
to be a scholar must have the heroic mind, emerson said. 
the student concentrates and does not like to fight; "gives his opinion 
firmly and rests on it"—in the manner of the poet; 
is reclusive, and reserved; and has such 
ways, not because he has no feeling but because he has so much. 
boasting provokes jibes, and in this country we’ve no cause to boast; we are 
as a nation perhaps, undergraduates not students. 
but anyone who studies will advance. 
are we to grow up or not? they are not all college boys in france. 
no swan so fine 
"no water so still as the 
dead fountains of versailles." no swan, 
with swart blind look askance 
and gondoliering legs, so fine 
as the chintz china one with fawn- 
brown eyes and toothed gold 
collar on to show whose bird it was. 
lodged in the louis fifteenth 
candelabrum-tree of cockscomb- 
tinted buttons, dahlias, 
sea-urchins, and everlastings, 
it perches on the branching foam 
of polished sculptured 
flowers—at ease and tall. the king is dead. 
too much 
a roman hired an 
artist, a freedman, 
to make a cone—pine-cone 
or fir-cone—with holes for a fountain. placed on 
the prison of st. angelo, this cone 
of the pompeys which is known 
now as the popes’, passed 
for art. a huge cast 
bronze, dwarfing the peacock 
statue in the garden of the vatican, 
it looks like a work of art made to give 
to a pompey, or native 
of thebes. others could 
build, and understood 
making colossi and 
how to use slaves, and kept crocodiles and put 
baboons on the necks of giraffes to pick 
fruit, and used serpent magic. 
they had their men tie 
hippopotami 
and bring out dapple dogcats 
to course antelopes, dikdik, and ibex; 
or used small eagles. they looked on as theirs, 
impalas and onagers, 
the wild ostrich herd 
with hard feet and bird 
necks rearing back in the 
dust like a serpent preparing to strike, cranes, 
storks, anoas, mongooses, and nile geese. 
and there were gardens for these— 
combining planes, dates, 
limes, and pomegranates, 
in avenues—with square 
pools of pink flowers, tame fish, and small frogs. besides 
yarns dyed with indigo, and red cotton, 
they had a flax which they spun 
into fine linen 
cordage for yachtsmen. 
these people liked small things; 
they gave to boys little paired playthings such as 
nests of eggs, ichneumon and snake, paddle 
and raft, badger and camel; 
and made toys for them- 
selves: the royal totem; 
and toilet-boxes marked 
with the contents. lords and ladies put goose-grease 
paint in round bone boxes with pivoting 
lid incised with the duck-wing 
or reverted duck- 
head; kept in a buck 
or rhinoceros horn, 
the ground horn; and locust oil in stone locusts. 
it was a picture with a fine distance; 
of drought, and of assistance 
in time, from the nile 
rising slowly, while 
the pig-tailed monkey on 
slab-hands, with arched-up slack-slung gait, and the brown 
dandy, looked at the jasmine two-leafed twig 
and bud, cactus-pads, and fig. 
dwarfs here and there, lent 
to an evident 
poetry of frog grays, 
duck-egg greens, and egg-plant blues, a fantasy 
and a verisimilitude that were 
right to those with, everywhere, 
power over the poor. 
the bees’ food is your 
food. those who tended flowerbeds 
and stables were like the king’s cane in the 
form of a hand, or the folding bedroom 
made for his mother of whom 
he was fond. princes 
clad in queens’ dresses 
calla or petunia 
white that trembled at the edge, and queens in a 
king’s underskirt of fine-twilled thread like silk- 
worm gut, as bee-man and milk- 
maid, kept divine cows 
and bees; limestone brows, 
and gold-foil wings. they made 
basalt serpents and portraits of beetles; the 
king gave his name to them and he was named 
for them. he feared snakes and tamed 
pharaoh’s rat, the rust- 
backed mongoose. no bust 
of it was made, but there 
was pleasure for the rat. its restlessness was 
its excellence; it was praised for its wit; 
and the jerboa, like it, 
a small desert rat, 
and not famous, that 
lives without water, has 
happiness. abroad seeking food, or at home 
in its burrow, the sahara field-mouse 
has a shining silver house 
of sand. o rest and 
joy, the boundless sand, 
the stupendous sand-spout, 
no water, no palm-trees, no ivory bed, 
tiny cactus; but one would not be he 
who has nothing but plenty. 
in costa rica 
in blazing driftwood 
the green keeps showing at the same place; 
as, intermittently, the fire-opal shows blue and green. 
in costa rica the true chinese lizard face 
is found, of the amphibious falling dragon, the living firework. 
he leaps and meets his 
likeness in the stream and, king with king, 
helped by his three-part plume along the back, runs on two legs, 
tail dragging; faints upon the air; then with a spring 
dives to the stream-bed, hiding as the chieftain with gold body hid in 
guatavita lake. 
he runs, he flies, he swims, to get to 
his basilica—"the ruler of rivers, lakes, and seas, 
invisible or visible," with clouds to do 
as bid—and can be "long or short, and also coarse or fine at pleasure." with a 
modest quiver, he 
ascends the bank on clinging tree-frog 
hands, and waits; the water draining, forms a lizard there, from 
skin now looking a little newer than the log 
it rested on & the thick mass of verdure all about. this is the 
feather basilisk 
of travelers’ tales, of which a pair stood 
bodyguard beside confucius’ crib: aquatic flying 
lizard-fairy detested by such dragonhood 
as michael fought. one has seen animals like his, though smaller, collide 
and fight, brother matched 
with brother, as if immune to pain; 
push, struggle and breathe hard; swell out and muster strength, withdraw, 
advance; and swerving, almost fall—hoping to gain 
the mortal hold and that some fang should pierce the marrow. but when plumet 
territories touch, 
the masters of them are dramatic 
without shedding blood, exerting charm as chinese dragonwhiskers 
in a crystal handle charm; or as thickflowering 
orchids gather dragons, in the east, by forming clouds for them. 
the malay dragon 
we have ours; and they 
have theirs. ours has a skin feather crest; 
theirs has wings out from the waist which is snuff-brown or sallow. 
ours falls from trees on water; theirs is the smallest 
dragon that knows how to dive head-first from a tree-top to something dry. 
floating on spread ribs, 
the boat-like body settles on the 
clamshell-tinted spray sprung from the nutmeg-tree—minute legs 
trailing half akimbo—the true divinity 
of malay. among unfragrant orchids, on the unnutritious nut 
tree, myristica 
fragrans, the harmless god spreads ribs that 
do not raise a hood. this is the serpent-dove peculiar 
to the east; that lives as the butterfly or bat 
can, in a brood, conferring wings on what it grasps, as the air-plant does. 
the tuatera 
elsewhere, sea lizards— 
congregated so there is not room 
to step, with tails laid criss-cross, alligator-style, among 
birds toddling in and out—are innocent of whom 
they neighbor. bird-reptile social life is pleasing. the tuatera 
will tolerate a 
petrel in its den, and lays ten eggs 
or nine—the number laid by dragons since "a true dragon 
has nine sons." the frilled lizard, the kind with no legs, 
and the three-horned chameleon, are non-serious ones that take to flight 
if you do not. in 
copenhagen the principal door 
of the bourse is roofed by two pairs of dragons standing on 
their heads—twirled by the architect—so that the four 
green tails conspiring upright, symbolize four-fold security. now, 
the frigate pelican 
rapidly cruising or lying on the air there is a bird 
that realizes rasselas’s friend’s project 
of wings uniting levity with strength. this 
hell-diver, frigate-bird, hurricane- 
bird; unless swift is the proper word 
for him, the storm omen when 
he flies close to the waves, should be seen 
fishing, although oftener 
he appears to prefer 
to take, on the wing, from industrious cruder-winged species 
the fish they have caught, and is seldom successless. 
a marvel of grace, no matter how fast his 
victim may fly or how often may 
turn, the dishonest pelican’s ease 
in pursuit, bears him away 
with the fish that the badgered bird drops. 
a kind of superlative 
swallow, that likes to live 
on food caught while flying, he is not a pelican. the toe 
with slight web, air-boned body, and very long wings 
with the spread of a swan’s—duplicating a 
bow-string as he floats overhead—feel 
the changing v-shaped scissor swallow- 
tail direct the rigid keel. 
and steering beak to windward always, 
the fleetest foremost fairy 
among birds, outflies the 
aeroplane which cannot flap its wings nor alter any quill- 
tip. for him, the feeling in a hand, in fins, is 
in his unbent downbent crafty oar. with him 
other pelicans aimlessly soar 
as he does; separating, until 
not flapping they rise once more, 
closing in without looking and move 
outward again to the top 
of the circle and stop 
and blow back, allowing the wind to reverse their direction. 
this is not the stalwart swan that can ferry the 
woodcutter’s two children home; no. make hay; keep 
the shop; i have one sheep; were a less 
limber animal’s mottoes. this one 
finds sticks for the swan’s-down dress 
of his child to rest upon and would 
not know gretel from hänsel. 
as impassioned handel— 
meant for a lawyer and a masculine german domestic 
career—clandestinely studied the harpsichord 
and never was known to have fallen in love, 
the unconfiding frigate-bird hides 
in the height and in the majestic 
display of his art. he glides 
a hundred feet or quivers about 
as charred paper behaves—full 
of feints; and an eagle 
of vigilance, earns the term aquiline; keeping at a height 
so great the feathers look black and the beak does not 
show. it is not retreat but exclusion from 
which he looks down and observes what went 
secretly, as it thought, out of sight 
among dense jungle plants. sent 
ahead of the rest, there goes the true 
knight in his jointed coat that 
covers all but his bat 
ears; a-trot, with stiff pig gait—our tame armadillo, loosed by 
his master and as pleased as a dog. beside the 
spattered blood—that orchid which the native fears— 
the fer-de-lance lies sleeping; centaur- 
like, this harmful couple’s amity 
is apropos. a jaguar 
and crocodile are fighting. sharp-shinned 
hawks and peacock-freckled small 
cats, like the literal 
merry-go-round, come wandering within the circular view 
of the high bird for whom from the air they are ants 
keeping house all their lives in the crack of a 
crag with no view from the top. and here, 
unlikely animals learning to 
dance, crouch on two steeds that rear 
behind a leopard with a frantic 
face, tamed by an artemis 
who wears a dress like his, 
and hampering haymaker’s hat. festina lente. be gay 
civilly. how so? "if i do well i am blessed 
whether any bless me or not, and if i do 
ill i am cursed." we watch the moon rise 
on the susquehanna. in his way 
this most romantic bird, flies 
to a more mundane place, the mangrove 
swamp, to sleep. he wastes the moon. 
but he, and others, soon 
rise from the bough, and though flying are able to foil the tired 
moment of danger, that lays on heart and lungs the 
weight of the python that crushes to powder. 
the tune’s illiterate footsteps fail; 
the steam hacks are not to be admired. 
these, unturbulent, avail 
themselves of turbulence to fly—pleased 
with the faint wind’s varyings, 
on which to spread fixed wings. 
the reticent lugubrious ragged immense minuet 
descending to leeward, ascending to windward 
again without flapping, in what seems to be 
a way of resting, are now nearer, 
but as seemingly bodiless yet 
as they were. theirs are somber 
quills for so wide and lightboned a bird 
as the frigate pelican 
of the caribbean. 
the buffalo 
black in blazonry means 
prudence; and niger, unpropitious. might 
hematite- 
black incurved compact horns on a bison 
have significance? the 
soot brown tail-tuft on 
a kind of lion- 
tail; what would that express? 
and john steuart curry’s ajax pulling 
grass—no ring 
in his nose—two birds standing on his back? 
though prints like this cannot 
show if they were black 
birds, nor the color 
of the back. the modern 
ox does not look like the augsburg ox’s 
portrait. yes, 
the great extinct wild aurochs was a beast 
to paint, with stripe and sixfoot 
horn-spread—decreased 
to siamese-cat- 
brown swiss size, or zebu 
shape with white plush dewlap and warm-blooded 
hump; to red- 
skinned hereford or to piebald holstein. yet 
some would say the sparse-haired 
buffalo has met 
human notions best— 
unlike the elephant, 
both jewel and jeweler in the hairs 
that he wears— 
no white-nosed vermont ox yoked with its twin 
to haul the maple sap, 
up to their knees in 
snow; no freakishly 
over-drove ox drawn by 
rowlandson, but the indian buffalo, 
albino- 
footed, standing in the mud-lake, with a 
day’s work to do. no white 
christian heathen, waylaid 
by the buddha, 
serves him so well as the 
buffalo—as mettlesome as if check- 
reined—free neck 
stretching out, and snake-tail in a half twist 
on the flank; nor will so 
cheerfully assist 
the sage sitting with 
feet at the same side, to 
dismount at the shrine; nor are there any 
ivory 
tusks like those two horns which when a tiger 
coughs, are lowered fiercely 
and convert the fur 
to harmless rubbish. 
the indian buffalo, 
led by bare-leggèd herd-boys to a hay 
hut where they 
stable it, need not fear comparison 
with bison, with the twins, 
nor with anyone 
of ox ancestry. 
nine nectarines and other porcelain 
arranged by two’s as peaches are, 
at intervals that all may live— 
eight and a single one, on twigs that 
grew the year before—they look like 
a derivative; 
although not uncommonly 
the opposite is seen— 
nine peaches on a nectarine. 
fuzzless through slender crescent leaves 
of green or blue—or both, 
in the chinese style—the four 
pairs’ half-moon leaf-mosaic turns 
out to the sun the sprinkled blush 
of puce-american-beauty pink 
applied to beeswax gray by the 
unenquiring brush 
of mercantile bookbinding. 
like the peach yu, the red- 
cheeked peach which cannot aid the dead, 
but eaten in time prevents death, 
the italian peachnut, 
persian plum, ispahan 
secluded wall-grown nectarine, 
as wild spontaneous fruit was 
found in china first. but was it wild? 
prudent de candolle would not say. 
we cannot find flaws 
in this emblematic group 
of nine, with leaf window 
unquilted by curculio— 
which someone once depicted on 
this much-mended plate; or 
in the also accurate 
unantlered moose, or iceland horse, 
or ass, asleep against the old 
thick, low-leaning nectarine that is the 
color of the shrub-tree’s brownish 
flower. from manifold 
small boughs, productive as the 
magic willow that grew 
above the mother’s grave and threw 
on cinderella what she wished, 
a bat is winging. it 
is a moonlight scene, bringing 
the animal so near, its eyes 
are separate from the face—mere 
delicately drawn gray discs, out from 
itself in space. imperial 
happiness lives here 
on the peaches of long life 
that make it permanent. 
a fungus could have meant 
long life; a crane, a stork, a dove. 
china, with flowers and birds 
and half-beasts, became the land 
of the best china-making first. 
hunts and domestic scenes occur 
in france on dinner-plates, signed on the 
back with a two-finned fish; england 
has an officer 
in jack-boots seated in a 
bosquet, the cow, the flock 
of sheep, the pheasant, the peacock 
sweeping near with lifted claw; the 
skilled peonian rose 
and the rosebud that began 
with william billingsley (once poor, 
like a monkey on a dolphin, tossed 
by ocean, mighty monster) until 
josiah spode adopted him. 
yet with the gold-glossed 
serpent handles, are there green 
cocks with "brown beaks and cheeks 
and dark blue combs" and mammal freaks 
that, like the chinese certainties 
and sets of precious things, 
dare to be conspicuous? 
theirs is a race that "understands 
the spirit of the wilderness" 
and the nectarine-loving kylin 
of pony appearance—the long- 
tailed or the tailless 
small cinnamon-brown common 
camel-haired unicorn 
with antelope feet and no horn, 
here enamelled on porcelain. 
it was a chinese who 
imagined this masterpiece. 
pigeons 
older than the ancient greeks, than 
solomon, the pigeon family is a 
ramifying one, a 
banyan of banyans; to begin 
with, bluish slate, 
but with ability. modesty cannot dull 
the lustre of the pigeon 
swift and sure, coming quickest and 
straightest just after a storm. the great 
lame war hero cher ami, the 
lost battalion’s gallant bird; and 
mocker with one eye 
destroyed, delivering his dispatch 
to his superiors; and sergeant dunn, 
civilian pigeon who flew eight 
hundred sixty-eight miles 
in four days and six hours; 
and destined to hatch 
in france, spike, veteran of 
the division in which mocker 
served—exceptional messenger. 
"rarely was confidence misplaced" a newspaper 
says. dastardly comment 
inexactly phrased, as used of her- 
mes, ariel, or leander— 
pigeons of the past. neither was confidence 
misplaced in the javan- 
sumatran birds the dutch had had 
brought from baghdad. 
mysterious animal with a magnetic 
feel by which he traces backward 
his transportation outward, 
even in a fog at sea, though glad 
to be tossed near enough the loft 
or coop to get back the same day. 
"home on time without 
his message." what matter since he has 
got back. migrating always in the same 
direction, bringing all letters 
to the same address, see- 
ing better homes than his, 
he is not theudas 
boasting himself to be some- 
body, this anonymous post- 
man who, as soon as he could fly, 
was carrying valentines and messages of 
state; or soberer news— 
"so please write me and believe that i 
am yours very truly"; fine words 
those. an instrument not just an instinctive 
individual, this 
dove, that lifts his right foot over 
the alighting- 
board to rejoin his ungainly pin-clad dark-skinned 
brood as domestic turtle- 
doves might; two. invariably 
two. the turtle, a not exciting 
bird—in britain shy, detected 
by its constantly heard coo, with- 
out a song but not 
without a voice—does well to stay far 
out of sight; but the pelew pigeon with 
black head, metallic wasp-lustred 
grass-green breast and purple 
legs and feet, need not; nor 
need the nicobar, 
novel, narrow-feathered dove. 
and one should see the papuan 
fancrests with six-sided scale which 
coats the foot; "not much is known about these splendid 
birds" hid in unimag- 
inably weak lead-colored ostrich- 
plumes a third of an inch long, and 
needle-fine cat-whisker-fibered battleship- 
gray lace. the samoan 
tooth-billed pigeon fortunately 
survives also— 
saved from destruction by no longer feeding on 
the ground, a bird with short legs 
and heavy bill, remarkable 
because related to the dodo. 
didus ineptus; man’s remorse 
enshrines it now, abundant still 
in sixteen-one. "a 
little bigger than our swans, these birds 
want wings and lay but one egg" the traveler 
said—"defenceless unsuspicious 
things, with a cry like the 
cry of a gosling." il 
dóudo (the words 
mean simple one)—extinct as 
the solitaires which having "raised 
their young one do not disunite." 
a new pigeon cannot compensate, but we have 
it. with neat-cered eye, long 
face, trim form and posture, this delight- 
ful bird outdoes the dashingly 
black and white dalmatian dog and map-freckled 
pony that indians dress 
with feathers seriatim down 
the mane and tail;— 
a slender cinderella deliberately 
pied, so she on each side is 
the same, an all-feather piebald, 
cuckoo-marked on a titanic scale 
taking perhaps sixteen birds to 
show the whole design, as in chess 
played with men and hors- 
es. yes, the thus medievally 
two-colored sea-pie-patterned semi-swan- 
necked magpie-pigeon, gamecock-legged 
with long-clawed toes, and all 
extremes—head neck back tail 
and feet—coal black, the 
rest snow white, has a surpris- 
ing modernness and fanciness 
and stateliness and…. yes indeed; 
developed by and humbly dedicated to 
the gentlemen of the 
feather club, this is a dainty breed. 
see in the midst of fair leaves 
and much fruit, the swan— 
one line of the mathematician’s 
sign greater-than, drawn 
to an apex where the lake is 
met by the weight on it; or an angel 
standing in the sun, how well 
armed, how manly; 
and promenading 
in sloughs of despond, a monster— 
man when human nothing 
more, grown to immaturity, 
punishing debtors, seeking his due—as 
an arrow turned inward has 
no chance of peace. 
walking-sticks and paperweights and watermarks 
walking among scepter-headed 
weeds and daisies swayed by wind, they said, 
"don’t scatter your 
stick, on account of the souls." led 
from sun-spotted 
paths, we went "where leafy trees meet 
overhead and noise of traffic is unknown"— 
the mind exhilarated 
by life all round, so stirringly 
alive. the root-handled cudgel 
with the bark left on, the woodbine smell- 
ing of the rain, 
the very stones, have life. little 
scars on church-bell 
tongues put there by the devil’s claws— 
authentic phantoms, ghosts, and witches, transformed 
into an invisible 
fabric of inconsistency 
motheaten by self-subtractives— 
now as outright murderers and thieves, 
thrive openly. 
an epigraph before it leaves 
the wax, receives 
to give, and giving must itself 
receive, "difficulty is ordained to check 
poltroons," and courage achieves 
despaired of ends. oppositely 
jointed against indecision, 
the three legs of the triskelion 
meeting in the 
middle between triangles, run 
in unison 
without assistance. yet, trudging 
on two legs that move contradictorily, 
irked by ghosts and witches, one 
does not fear to ask for beauty 
that is power devoid of fear. 
a bold outspoken gentleman, cheer- 
ful, plodding, to- 
the-point, used to the atmosphere 
of work—who here 
appropriate to the thought of 
permanence, says, "this is my taste, it might not 
be another man’s"—makes clear 
that stark sincere unflattery, 
sine cera, is both farthest 
from self-defensiveness and nearest; 
as when a seal 
without haste, slowly is impressed 
and forms a nest 
on which the raised device reversed, 
shows round. it must have been an able workman, 
studious and self-possessed, 
a liker of solidity, 
who gave a greenish waterford 
glass fool’s cap with summit curled down toward 
itself as the 
glass grew, the look of tempered swordsteel, 
and three-ore-d 
fishscale-burnished antimony- 
tin-and-lead’s smoky water-drop type-metal 
smoothness emery-armored 
against rust. its subdued glossy 
splendor leaps out at the eye as 
form dramatizes thought, in the glass 
witchball and air- 
twist cane. this paperweight, in mass 
a stone, surpass- 
ing it in tint, enlarges the 
fine chain-lines in the waterleaf weighted by 
its hardened raindrop surface. 
the paper-mould’s similarly 
once unsolid waspnest-blue, snow- 
white, or seashell-gray rags, seen through, show 
sheepcotes, turkey- 
mills, acorns, and anvils. "stones grow," 
then stop, and so 
do gardens. "plants grow and live; men 
grow and live and think." utilizey la poste 
aerienne, trade will follow 
the telephone. the post’s jerky 
cancellings ink the stamp, relet- 
tering stiltedly, as a puppet- 
acrobat walks 
about with high steps on his net, 
an alphabet 
of words and animals where the 
wire-embedded watermark’s more integral 
expressiveness had first set 
its alabaster effigy. 
in bark silverer than the swan, 
esparto grass, or so-called titan 
parchment tougher 
than hercules’ lion-skin—spanish, 
umbrian, 
eastern, open, and jeweled crowns, 
corroborate the dolphin, crane, and ox; sealed 
with wax by a pelican 
studying affectionately 
a nest’s three-in-one cartwheel tri- 
legged face. "for those we love, live and die" 
the motto says. 
and we do. part pelican, i, 
doubting the high- 
way’s wide giant trivia where 
three roads meet in artificial openness, 
am obliged to justify 
outspoken cordiality. 
firm-feathered juniper springing 
from difficult ground, the sky trembling 
with power, the rain 
falling upon the bird singing, 
modest printing, 
on honest paper properly 
trimmed, are gifts addressed to memory, and a 
gift is permanent, shining 
like the juniper’s trinity 
of spines. an unburdensomely 
worthy officer of charity, 
the evergreen 
with awlshaped leaves in whorls of three— 
successively 
firm. "on the first day of christmas 
my true love he sent unto me, part of a 
bough of a juniper-tree," 
javelin-ed consecutively. 
virginia britannia 
pale sand edges england’s old 
dominion. the air is soft, warm, hot, 
above the cedar-dotted emerald shore 
known to the redbird, 
the redcoated musketeer, 
the trumpet-flower, the cavalier, 
the parson, and the 
wild parishioner. a deer- 
track in a church-floor 
brick and sir george yeardley’s 
coffin-tacks and tomb remain. 
the now tremendous vine-en- 
compassed hackberry 
starred with the ivy-flower, 
shades the church tower. 
and "a great sinner lyeth here" under 
the sycamore. 
a fritillary zigzags 
toward the seemly resting-place of this 
unusual man and pleasing sinner who 
"waits for a joyful 
resurrection." we-re-wo- 
comoco’s fur crown could be no 
odder than we were 
with ostrich, latin motto, 
and small gold horse-shoe, 
as arms for an able 
sting-ray-hampered pioneer, 
painted as a turk it seems, 
the incessantly 
exciting captain smith 
who patient with 
his inferiors, was a pugnacious 
equal; and to 
powhatan obliged, but not 
a flatterer. rare indian, crowned by 
christopher newport! the old dominion has 
all-green grass-hoppers 
in all-green, box-sculptured grounds; 
an almost english green surrounds 
them. care has formed a- 
mong unenglish insect sounds, 
the white wall-rose. as 
thick as daniel boone’s grape- 
vine, the stem has wide-spaced great 
blunt alternating ostrich- 
skin warts that were thorns. 
care has formed walls of yew 
since indians knew 
the fort old field and narrow neck of land 
that jamestown was. 
observe the terse virginian, 
the mettlesome gray one that drives the 
owl from tree to tree and imitates the call 
of whippoorwill or 
lark or katydid—the leadgray 
lead-legged mocking-bird with head 
held half away, and 
meditative eye as dead 
as sculptured marble 
eye, alighting noiseless, 
muses in the semi-sun, 
standing on tall thin legs as 
if he did not see, 
conspicuous, alone, 
on the round stonetopped 
table with lead cupids grouped to form 
the pedestal. 
narrow herring-bonelaid bricks, 
a dusty pink beside the dwarf box- 
bordered pansies, share the ivy-arbor shade 
with cemetery 
lace settees, one at each side, 
and with the bird: box-bordered tide- 
water gigantic 
jet black pansies (splendor; pride;) 
not for a decade 
dressed, but for a day, in 
overpowering velvet; and 
gray blue-andalusian 
cock-feather pale ones 
ink-lined on the edge, fur- 
eyed, with ochre 
on the cheek. the slowmoving glossy, tall 
quick cavalcade 
of buckeye-brown surprising 
jumpers, the contrasting work-mule and 
show-mule \& witch-cross door \& "strong sweet prison" 
are part of what 
has come about, in the black 
idiom, from advancing backward 
in a circle; 
from taking the potomac 
cowbirdlike; and on 
the chickahominy 
establishing the negro, opportunely brought, to strength- 
en protest against 
tyranny. rare unscent- 
ed, providently 
hot, too sweet, inconsistent flowerbed! 
old dominion 
earth makes sunflower-heads grow large; 
hibiscus and so-called mimosa 
close at night; the scarlet peculiarly-quilled 
pomegranate-petals, 
the african violet, 
and camellia, perfumeless. yet 
house-high glistening green 
magnolia-trees with velvet- 
textured flower, are filled 
with anaesthetic scent 
enough to make one die; as 
the gardenia is, though its 
two-toned green-furled buds 
and dark leaf-vein on green- 
er leaf when seen 
against the light attract no pigmy bees 
such as the frilled 
silk substanceless faint flower of 
the crape-myrtle does. odd pamunkey 
princess, birdclaw-earringed; with a pet raccoon 
from the mattapo- 
ni (what a bear!) feminine 
odd indian young lady! odd thin- 
gauze-and-taffeta- 
dressed english one! terrapin 
meat and crested spoon 
feed the mistress of french 
plum-and-turquoise-piped chaise-longue; 
of brass-knobbed slat front-door and 
everywhere open 
shaded house on indian- 
named virginian 
streams, in counties named for english lords. the 
rattlesnake soon 
said from our once dashingly 
undiffident first flag, "don’t tread on 
me," tactless symbol of a new republic. 
priorities were 
cradled in this region not 
noted for humility; spot 
that has high-singing 
frogs, cotton-mouth snakes and cot- 
ton-fields; clay for brick, 
lawrence jugs with persian 
loping wolf design; and hounds. 
here the poor unpoisonous 
terrapin likes to 
idle near the sea-top; 
tobacco-crop 
gains have church tablets; devil’s woodyard swamps 
and one-brick-thick- 
wall serpentine shadows star- 
tle strangers. the strangler fig, the dwarf- 
fancying egyptian, the american, 
the dutch, the noble 
roman, in taking what they 
pleased—colonizing as we say— 
were not all intel- 
lect and delicacy. a 
black savage or such 
as was subject to the 
deer-fur crown is not all brawn 
and animality. the 
limestone tea-table, 
the mandolin-shaped big 
and little fig, 
and the now disused silkworm-trees, imply 
amity; much 
kind tyranny made ha-has 
that kept back cows; clock-strengthened stocking 
and drooping cotton dress with handmade edge, mark 
tyrant taste; the song- 
bird wakes too soon, to enjoy 
excellent idleness, destroy- 
ing legitimate 
laziness, this unbought toy 
even in the dark 
risking loud whee whee whee 
of joy, the caraway-seed- 
spotted sparrow perched in the 
dew-drenched juniper 
beside the window-ledge; 
the little hedgesparrow 
that wakes up seven minutes soon- 
er than the lark 
they say. the live oak’s rounded 
mass of undulating boughs, the white 
pine, the agèd hackberry—handsomest vis- 
itor of all—the 
cedar’s etched solidity, 
the cypress, lose identity 
and are one tree, as 
sunset flames increasingly 
against their leaf-chis- 
elled blackening ridge of green; 
and the redundantly wind- 
widened clouds expanding to 
earth size above the 
town’s bothered with wages 
childish sages, 
are to the child an intimation of 
what glory is. 
bird-witted 
with innocent wide penguin eyes, three 
grown fledgling mocking-birds below 
the pussy-willow tree, 
stand in a row, 
wings touching, feebly solemn, 
till they see 
their no longer larger 
mother bringing 
something which will partially 
feed one of them. 
towards the high-keyed intermittent squeak 
of broken carriage-springs, made by 
the three similar, meek- 
coated bird’s-eye 
freckled forms she comes; and when 
from the beak 
of one, the still living 
beetle has dropped 
out, she picks it up and puts 
it in again. 
standing in the shade till they have dressed 
their thickly-filamented, pale 
pussy-willow-surfaced 
coats, they spread tail 
and wings, showing one by one, 
the modest 
white stripe lengthwise on the 
tail and crosswise 
on the under wing, and the 
accordion 
is closed again. what delightful note 
with rapid unexpected flute- 
sounds leaping from the throat 
of the astute 
grown bird comes back to one from 
the remote 
unenergetic sun- 
lit air before 
the brood was here? why has the 
bird’s voice become 
harsh? a piebald cat observing them, 
is slowly creeping toward the trim 
trio on the tree-stem. 
unused to him 
the three make room—uneasy 
new problem. 
a dangling foot that missed 
its grasp, is raised 
and finds the twig on which it 
planned to perch. the 
parent darting down, nerved by what chills 
the blood, and by hope rewarded— 
of toil—since nothing fills 
squeaking unfed 
mouths, wages deadly combat, 
and half kills 
with bayonet beak and 
cruel wings, the 
intellectual, cautious- 
l y c r e e p i n g c a t. 
half deity 
half worm. we all, infant and adult, have 
stopped to watch the butterfly—last of the 
elves—and learned to spare the wingless worm 
that hopefully ascends the tree. the well-known 
silk tiger swallowtail 
of south america, with body lightly 
furred was that bearing pigments which engrave 
the lower wings with dragon’s blood, weightless. 
they that have wings must not have weights. this more 
peninsula-tailed one with a black 
pitchfork-scallop edge on sunburnt zebra-skin, 
tired by the trip it made 
with drover-like tenacity, has been 
sleeping upright on the elm. its yellowness, 
that of the autumn poplar-leaf, by day 
has been observed. disguised in butterfly- 
bush wedgwood-blue, psyche follows it 
to that small tree, micromalus, the midget 
crab; to the mimosa; 
and from that, to the flowering pomegranate. 
baffled not by the quick-clouding serene gray 
moon but forced by the hot hot sun to pant, 
she stands on rug-soft grass; though "it is not 
permitted to gaze informally 
on majesty in such a manner as might 
well happen here." the blind 
all-seeing butterfly, fearing the slight 
finger, wanders, as though it were ignorant, 
across the path and lights on zephyr’s palm, 
planting forefeet soberly; then pawing 
like a horse, turns round—apostrophe- 
tipped brown antennae: porcupining out as 
it arranges nervous 
wings. vexed because curiosity has 
been pursuing it, it cannot now be calm. 
the butterfly’s round unglazed china eyes, 
pale tobacco brown, with the large eyes of 
the nymph on them—gray eyes that now are 
black, for she with controlled agitated glance 
observes the insect’s face 
and all’s a-quiver with significance— 
enact the scene of cats’ eyes on the magpie’s 
eyes, by goya. butterflies do not need 
home advice. as though zephyr and psyche 
were patent-leather cricket singing 
loud, and gnat-catching garden-toad, the swallow- 
tail bewitched and danger- 
ous, springs away, zebra half-deified, 
trampling the air as it tramples the flowers, feed- 
ing where it pivots. twig-veined irascible 
fastidious stubborn undisciplined 
zebra! sometimes one is grateful to 
a stranger for looking very nice. but free 
to leave the outspread hand 
it flies, drunken with triviality 
or guided by visions of strength, off until, 
diminishing like wreckage on the sea, 
rising and falling easily, it mounts 
the swell and keeping its true course with 
what swift majesty, indifferent to 
us, is gone. deaf to ap- 
proval—magnet-nice, as it flutters through 
airs now slack, now fresh. it has strict ears when the 
west wind speaks. it was he, with mirror eyes 
of strong anxiety, who had no net 
or flowering shrewd-scented tropical 
device, or lignum vitae perch in half-shut 
hand; for ours is not a 
canely land; nor was it oberon, but 
this quiet young man with piano replies, 
named zephyr, whose hand spread out was enough 
to tempt the fiery tiger-horse to stand, 
eyes staring skyward and chest arching 
bravely out—historic metamorphoser 
and saintly animal 
in india, in egypt, anywhere. 
his talk was as strange as my grandmother’s muff. 
smooth gnarled crape myrtle 
a brass-green bird with grass- 
green throat smooth as a nut, springs from 
twig to twig askew, copying the 
chinese flower piece—businesslike atom 
in the stiff-leafed tree’s blue- 
pink, dregs-of-wine, pyramids 
of mathematic 
circularity—one of a 
pair. a redbird with a hatchet 
crest lights straight, on a twig 
between the two, bending the 
peculiar 
bouquet down; and there are 
several black antique 
bootjack fireflies touched with weak bright 
hunting-pink. "the legendary white- 
eared black bulbul that sings 
only in pure sanskrit" should 
be here—"tame clever 
true nightingale." the cardinal- 
bird that is usually a 
pair looks somewhat odd, like 
"the ambassadorial 
inverness 
worn by one who dresses 
in new york but dreams of 
london." it was artifice saw 
on a patch-box pigeon-egg, room for 
fervent script, and wrote as with a bird’s claw 
under the pair on the 
hyacinth-blue lid—"joined in 
friendship, crowned by love." 
an aspect may deceive; as the 
elephant’s columbine-tubed trunk 
held waveringly out— 
an at will heavy thing—is 
delicate. 
art is unfortunate. 
one may be a blameless 
bachelor and it is but a 
step to congreve. a rosalindless 
redbird comes where people are, knowing they 
have not made a point of 
being where he is—this bird 
which says not sings, "without 
loneliness i should be more 
lonely, so i keep it"—half in 
japanese. and what of 
our clasped hands that swear "by peace 
plenty; as 
by wisdom peace." alas! 
the pangolin 
another armored animal—scale 
lapping scale with spruce-cone regu- 
larity until they 
form the uninterrupted central 
tail-row. this near artichoke 
with head and legs and grit-equipped giz- 
zard, the night miniature artist- 
engineer, is    leonardo’s 
indubitable son? im- 
pressive animal 
and toiler, of whom we seldom hear. 
armor seems extra. but for him, 
the closing ear- 
ridge—or bare 
ear, lacking even this small 
eminence—and similarly safe 
contracting nose and eye apertures 
impenetrably closable, 
are not;—a true ant-eat- 
er, not cockroach-eater, who endures 
exhausting solitary 
trips through unfamiliar ground at night, 
returning before sunrise; stepping 
in the moonlight,    on the moonlight 
peculiarly, that the out- 
side edges of his 
hands may bear the weight and save the claws 
for digging. serpentined about 
the tree, he draws 
away from 
danger unpugnaciously, 
with no sound but a harmless hiss; keep- 
ing the fragile grace of the thomas- 
of-leighton-buzzard westminster 
abbey wrought-iron vine, or 
rolls himself into a ball that has 
power to defy all effort 
to unroll it;—strongly intailed, neat 
head for core, on neck not breaking off, 
with curled-in feet. nevertheless 
he has sting-proof scales; and nest 
of rocks closed with earth 
from inside, which he can thus darken. 
sun and moon \& day and night \& man and beast 
each with a splen- 
dor which man 
in all his vileness cannot 
set aside; each with an excellence! 
"fearful yet to be feared," the armored 
ant-eater met by the driver 
ant does not turn back, but 
engulfs what he can, the flattened sword- 
edged leafpoints on the tail and 
artichoke-set leg and body plates 
quivering violently when it 
retaliates    and swarms on him. 
compact like the furled fringed frill 
on the hat-brim of 
gargallo’s hollow iron head of a 
matador, he will drop and will 
then walk away 
unhurt, al- 
though if unintruded on 
he will come slowly down the tree, helped 
by his tail. the giant-pangolin 
tail, graceful tool, as prop or hand 
or broom or axe, tipped like 
the elephant’s trunk with special skin, 
is not lost on this ant and 
stone swallowing uninjurable 
artichoke, which simpletons thought a 
living fable    whom the stones had 
nourished whereas ants had done 
so. pangolins are 
not aggressive animals; between 
dusk and day, they have the not un- 
chainlike, machine- 
like form and 
frictionless creep of a thing 
made graceful by adversities, con- 
versities. to explain grace requires 
a curious hand. if that which 
is at all were not for 
ever, why would those who graced the spires 
with animals and gathered 
there to rest, on cold luxurious 
low stone seats—a monk and monk and monk— 
between the thus ingenious roof- 
supports, have slaved to confuse 
grace with a kindly 
manner, time in which to pay a debt, 
the cure for sins, a graceful use 
of what are yet 
approved stone 
mullions branching out across 
the perpendiculars? a sailboat 
was the first machine. the manis, made 
for moving quietly also, 
is neither a prisoner 
nor a god; on hind feet plantigrade, 
with certain postures of a 
man. beneath sun and moon, man slaving 
to make his life more sweet, leaves half the 
flowers worth having,    needing to choose 
wisely how to use the strength;— 
a paper-maker 
like the wasp; a tractor of food-stuffs, 
like the ant; spidering a length 
of web from bluffs 
above a 
stream; in fighting, mechanicked 
like the pangolin; capsizing in 
disheartenment. bedizened or stark 
naked, man, the self, the being 
so-called human, writingmaster 
to this world, griffons a dark 
"like does not like like that is 
obnoxious"; and writes errror with four 
r’s. among animals, one has a 
sense of humor    then, which saves a 
few steps, which saves years—unig- 
norant, modest and 
unemotional, and all emo- 
tion; one with everlasting vig- 
or, power to grow 
though there are 
few of him—who can make one 
breathe faster, and make one erecter. 
not afraid of anything is he 
and then goes cowering forth, tread paced 
to meet an obstacle 
at every step. consistent with the 
formula—warm blood, no gills, 
two pairs of hands and a few hairs—that 
is a mammal; there he sits in his 
own habitat,    serge-clad, strong-shod. 
the prey of fear; he, always 
curtailed, extinguished, 
thwarted by the dusk, work partly done, 
says to the alternating blaze, 
"again the sun! 
anew each 
day; and new and new and new, 
that comes into and steadies my soul. 
rigorists 
"we saw reindeer 
browsing," a friend who’d been in lapland, said: 
"finding their own food; they are adapted 
to scant reino 
or pasture, yet they can run eleven 
miles in fifty minutes; the feet spread when 
the snow is soft, 
and act as snow-shoes. they are rigorists 
however handsomely cutwork artists 
of lapland and 
siberia elaborate the trace 
or saddle-girth with saw-tooth leather lace. 
one looked at us 
with its firm face part brown, part white,—a queen 
of alpine flowers. santa claus’ reindeer, seen 
at last, had gray- 
brown fur, with a neck like edelweiss or 
lion’s foot,—leontopodium more 
exactly." and 
this candelabrum-headed ornament 
for a place where ornaments are scarce, sent 
to alaska, 
was a gift preventing the extinction 
of the esquimo. the battle was won 
by a quiet man, 
sheldon jackson, evangel to that race 
whose reprieve he read in the reindeer’s face. 
four quartz crystal clocks 
there are four vibrators, the world’s exactest clocks; 
and these quartz time-pieces that tell 
time intervals to other clocks, 
these worksless clocks work well; 
and all four, independently the 
same, are there in the cool bell 
laboratory time 
vault. checked by a comparator with arlington, 
they punctualize the "radio, 
cinéma," and "presse,"—a group the 
giraudoux truth-bureau 
of hoped-for accuracy has termed 
"instruments of truth." we know— 
as jean giraudoux says 
certain arabs have not heard—that napoleon 
is dead; that a quartz prism when 
the temperature changes, feels 
the change and that the then 
electrified alternate edges 
oppositely charged, threaten 
careful timing; so that 
this water-clear crystal as the greeks used to say, 
this "clear ice" must be kept at the 
same coolness. repetition, with 
the scientist, should be 
synonymous with accuracy. 
the lemur-student can see 
that an aye-aye is not 
an angwan-tíbo, potto, or loris. the sea- 
side burden should not embarrass 
the bell-boy with the buoy-ball 
endeavoring to pass 
hotel patronesses; nor could a 
practiced ear confuse the glass 
eyes for taxidermists 
with eye-glasses from the optometrist. and as 
meridian-7 1, 2 
1, 2 gives, each fifteenth second 
in the same voice, the new 
data—"the time will be" so and so— 
you realize that "when you 
hear the signal," you’ll be 
hearing jupiter or jour pater, the day god— 
the salvaged son of father time— 
telling the cannibal chronos 
(eater of his proxime 
newborn progeny) that punctuality 
is not a crime. 
the paper nautilus 
for authorities whose hopes 
are shaped by mercenaries? 
writers entrapped by 
teatime fame and by 
commuters’ comforts? not for these 
the paper nautilus 
constructs her thin glass shell. 
giving her perishable 
souvenir of hope, a dull 
white outside and smooth- 
edged inner surface 
glossy as the sea, the watchful 
maker of it guards it 
day and night; she scarcely 
eats until the eggs are hatched. 
buried eight-fold in her eight 
arms, for she is in 
a sense a devil- 
fish, her glass ramshorn-cradled freight 
is hid but is not crushed. 
as hercules, bitten 
by a crab loyal to the hydra, 
was hindered to succeed, 
the intensively 
watched eggs coming from 
the shell free it when they are freed,— 
leaving its wasp-nest flaws 
of white on white, and close- 
laid ionic chiton-folds 
like the lines in the mane of 
a parthenon horse, 
round which the arms had 
wound themselves as if they knew love 
is the only fortress 
strong enough to trust to. 
nevertheless 
you’ve seen a strawberry 
that’s had a struggle; yet 
was, where the fragments met, 
a hedgehog or a starfish 
for the multitude 
of seeds. what better food 
than apple-seeds—the fruit 
within the fruit—locked in 
like counter-curved twin 
hazel-nuts? frost that kills 
the little rubber-plant- 
leaves of kok-saghyz-stalks, can’t 
harm the roots; they still grow 
in frozen ground. once where 
there was a prickly-pear- 
leaf clinging to barbed wire, 
a root shot down to grow 
in earth two feet below; 
as carrots form mandrakes 
or a ram’s-horn root some- 
times. victory won’t come 
to me unless i go 
to it; a grape-tendril 
ties a knot in knots till 
knotted thirty times,—so 
the bound twig that’s under- 
gone and over-gone, can’t stir. 
the weak overcomes its 
menace, the strong over- 
comes itself. what is there 
like fortitude! what sap 
went through that little thread 
to make the cherry red! 
the wood-weasel 
emerges daintily, the skunk— 
don’t laugh—in sylvan black and white chipmunk 
regalia. the inky thing 
adaptively whited with glistening 
goat-fur, is wood-warden. in his 
ermined well-cuttlefish-inked wool, he is 
determination’s totem. outlawed? 
his sweet face and powerful feet go about 
in chieftain’s coat of chilcat cloth. 
he is his own protection from the moth, 
noble little warrior. that 
otter-skin on it, the living pole-cat, 
smothers anything that stings. well,— 
this same weasel’s playful and his weasel 
associates are too. only 
wood-weasels shall associate with me. 
elephants 
uplifted and waved until immobilized 
wistarialike, the opposing opposed 
mouse-gray twined proboscises’ trunk formed by two 
trunks, fights itself to a spiraled inter-nosed 
deadlock of dyke-enforced massiveness. it’s a 
knock-down drag-out fight that asks no quarter? just 
a pastime, as when the trunk rains on itself 
the pool it siphoned up; or when—since each must 
provide his forty-pound bough dinner—he broke 
the leafy branches. these templars of the tooth, 
these matched intensities, take master care of 
master tools. one, sleeping with the calm of youth, 
at full length in the half dry sun-flecked stream-bed, 
rests his hunting-horn-curled trunk on shallowed stone. 
the sloping hollow of the sleeper’s body 
cradles the gently breathing eminence’s prone 
mahout, asleep like a lifeless six-foot 
frog, so feather light the elephant’s stiff 
ear’s unconscious of the crossed feet’s weight. and the 
defenseless human thing sleeps as sound as if 
incised with hard wrinkles, embossed with wide ears, 
invincibly tusked, made safe by magic hairs! 
as if, as if, it is all ifs; we are at 
much unease. but magic’s masterpiece is theirs,— 
houdini’s serenity quelling his fears. 
elephant ear-witnesses-to-be of hymns 
and glorias, these ministrants all gray or 
gray with white on legs or trunk, are a pilgrims’ 
pattern of revery not reverence,—a 
religious procession without any priests, 
the centuries-old carefullest unrehearsed 
play. blessed by buddha’s tooth, the obedient beasts 
themselves as toothed temples blessing the street, see 
the white elephant carry the cushion that 
carries the casket that carries the tooth. 
amenable to what, matched with him, are gnat 
trustees, he does not step on them as the white- 
canopied blue-cushioned tooth is augustly 
and slowly returned to the shrine. though white is 
the color of worship and of mourning, he 
is not here to worship and he is too wise 
to mourn,—a life-prisoner but reconciled. 
with trunk tucked up compactly—the elephant’s 
sign of defeat—he resisted, but is the child 
of reason now. his straight trunk seems to say: when 
what we hoped for came to nothing, we revived. 
as loss could not ever alter socrates’ 
tranquillity, the elephant has contrived 
equanimity. with the socrates of 
animals as with sophocles the bee, on whose 
tombstone a hive was incised, sweetness tinctures 
his gravity. his held up fore-leg for use 
as a stair, to be climbed or descended with 
the aid of his ear, expounds the brotherhood 
of creatures to man the encroacher by the 
small word with the dot, meaning know,—the verb bd. 
these knowers, these distinct rememberers 
like bu˙ d, of what they have experienced, are 
"unable to pierce by one dart from the bow 
four plaintain-leaves laid at the points of a square"; 
and cannot, like buddha, change missiles to wreaths, 
alter their shape, bisect hairs in the dark, make 
their wisdom apparent in rays of all hues, 
or turn heat, exasperated, to earthquake- 
fire. yet they "arouse the feeling that they are 
allied to man" and can change roles with their trustees. 
hardship makes the soldier; then teachableness 
makes him the philosopher—as socrates, 
prudently testing the suspicious thing, knew 
the wisest is he who’s not sure that he knows. 
who rides on a tiger can never dismount; 
asleep on an elephant, that is repose. 
the mind is an enchanting thing 
is an enchanted thing 
like the glaze on a 
katydid-wing 
subdivided by sun 
till the nettings are legion. 
like gieseking playing scarlatti; 
like the apteryx-awl 
as a beak, or the 
kiwi’s rain-shawl 
of haired feathers, the mind 
feeling its way as though blind, 
walks along with its eyes on the ground. 
it has memory’s ear 
that can hear without 
having to hear. 
like the gyroscope’s fall, 
truly unequivocal 
because trued by regnant certainty, 
it is a power of 
strong enchantment. it 
is like the dove- 
neck animated by 
sun; it is memory’s eye; 
it’s conscientious inconsistency. 
it tears off the veil; tears 
the temptation, the 
mist the heart wears, 
from its eyes,—if the heart 
has a face; it takes apart 
dejection. it’s fire in the dove-neck’s 
iridescence; in the 
inconsistencies 
of scarlatti. 
unconfusion submits 
its confusion to proof; it’s 
not a herod’s oath that cannot change. 
keeping their world large 
all too literally, their flesh 
and their spirit are our shield 
i can see from where i sit 
a freight train going by, rolling forward 
in the dark. i can't tell if it's one long train 
or a dozen—i close my eyes, listen. 
a freight train going by, rolling forward 
as our conversation backs up, bridges one gap 
or a dozen. i close my eyes, listen. 
there are gates within us, you say, 
as our conversation backs up, bridges a gap. 
you reach across the table, take my hand. 
there are gates within us, you say 
again. you're right, there's always a distance. 
you reach across the table, take my hand 
in the dark. i can't tell if it's one long train. 
again, you're right, there's always a distance. 
i can see from where i sit. 
hid by the august foliage and fruit of the grape vine, 
twine, 
your anatomy 
round the pruned and polished stem, 
chameleon. 
fire laid upon 
an emerald as long as 
the dark king’s massy 
one, 
could not snap the spectrum up for food as you have done. 
you wild, uncooked young fellow! 
the swinkèd hind will stumble home 
not looking at the tasks he scorned to shirk. 
impelled to respite by rough hands, 
the labored ox will bellow; 
while you stand there agape before your handiwork. 
not all good men are mellow. 
you savor of a walnut rind, 
of oak leaves, or plucked mullein on the brae. 
and yet with all your clumsiness, 
you give me pleasure, fellow; 
your candor compensates me for my old bouquet. 
if "compression is the first grace of style," 
you have it. contractility is a virtue 
as modesty is a virtue. 
it is not the acquisition of any one thing 
that is able to adorn, 
or the incidental quality that occurs 
as a concomitant of something well said, 
that we value in style, 
but the principle that is hid: 
in the absence of feet, "a method of conclusions"; 
"a knowledge of principles," 
in the curious phenomenon of your occipital horn. 
the illustration 
is nothing to you without the application. 
you lack half wit. you crush all the particles down 
into close conformity, and then walk back and forth on them. 
sparkling chips of rock 
are crushed down to the level of the parent block. 
were not "impersonal judgment in aesthetic matters, a metaphysical impossibility," you 
might fairly achieve 
it. as for butterflies, i can hardly conceive 
of one’s attending upon you, but to question 
the congruence of the complement is vain, if it exists. 
"attack is more piquant than concord," but when 
you tell me frankly that you would like to feel 
my flesh beneath your feet, 
i’m all abroad; i can but put my weapon up, and 
bow you out. 
gesticulation—it is half the language. 
let unsheathed gesticulation be the steel 
your courtesy must meet, 
since in your hearing words are mute, which to my senses 
are a shout. 
you use your mind 
like a millstone to grind 
chaff. 
you polish it 
and with your warped wit 
laugh 
at your torso, 
prostrate where the crow 
falls 
on such faint hearts 
as its god imparts, 
calls 
and claps its wings 
till the tumult brings 
more 
black minute-men 
to revive again, 
war 
at little cost. 
they cry for the lost 
head 
and seek their prize 
till the evening sky’s 
red 
a roman hired an 
artist, a freedman, 
to make a cone—pine-cone 
or fir-cone—with holes for a fountain. placed on 
the prison of st. angelo, this cone 
of the pompeys which is known 
now as the popes’, passed 
for art. a huge cast 
bronze, dwarfing the peacock 
statue in the garden of the vatican, 
it looks like a work of art made to give 
to a pompey, or native 
of thebes. others could 
build, and understood 
making colossi and 
how to use slaves, and kept crocodiles and put 
baboons on the necks of giraffes to pick 
fruit, and used serpent magic. 
they had their men tie 
hippopotami 
and bring out dapple dogcats 
to course antelopes, dikdik, and ibex; 
or used small eagles. they looked on as theirs, 
impalas and onagers, 
the wild ostrich herd 
with hard feet and bird 
necks rearing back in the 
dust like a serpent preparing to strike, cranes, 
storks, anoas, mongooses, and nile geese. 
and there were gardens for these— 
combining planes, dates, 
limes, and pomegranates, 
in avenues—with square 
pools of pink flowers, tame fish, and small frogs. besides 
yarns dyed with indigo, and red cotton, 
they had a flax which they spun 
into fine linen 
cordage for yachtsmen. 
these people liked small things; 
they gave to boys little paired playthings such as 
nests of eggs, ichneumon and snake, paddle 
and raft, badger and camel; 
and made toys for them- 
selves: the royal totem; 
and toilet-boxes marked 
with the contents. lords and ladies put goose-grease 
paint in round bone boxes with pivoting 
lid incised with the duck-wing 
or reverted duck- 
head; kept in a buck 
or rhinoceros horn, 
the ground horn; and locust oil in stone locusts. 
it was a picture with a fine distance; 
of drought, and of assistance 
in time, from the nile 
rising slowly, while 
the pig-tailed monkey on 
slab-hands, with arched-up slack-slung gait, and the brown 
dandy, looked at the jasmine two-leafed twig 
and bud, cactus-pads, and fig. 
dwarfs here and there, lent 
to an evident 
poetry of frog grays, 
duck-egg greens, and egg-plant blues, a fantasy 
and a verisimilitude that were 
right to those with, everywhere, 
power over the poor. 
the bees’ food is your 
food. those who tended flowerbeds 
and stables were like the king’s cane in the 
form of a hand, or the folding bedroom 
made for his mother of whom 
he was fond. princes 
clad in queens’ dresses 
calla or petunia 
white that trembled at the edge, and queens in a 
king’s underskirt of fine-twilled thread like silk- 
worm gut, as bee-man and milk- 
maid, kept divine cows 
and bees; limestone brows, 
and gold-foil wings. they made 
basalt serpents and portraits of beetles; the 
king gave his name to them and he was named 
for them. he feared snakes and tamed 
pharaoh’s rat, the rust- 
backed mongoose. no bust 
of it was made, but there 
was pleasure for the rat. its restlessness was 
its excellence; it was praised for its wit; 
and the jerboa, like it, 
a small desert rat, 
and not famous, that 
lives without water, has 
happiness. abroad seeking food, or at home 
in its burrow, the sahara field-mouse 
has a shining silver house 
of sand. o rest and 
joy, the boundless sand, 
the stupendous sand-spout, 
no water, no palm-trees, no ivory bed, 
tiny cactus; but one would not be he 
who has nothing but plenty. 
in costa rica 
in blazing driftwood 
the green keeps showing at the same place; 
as, intermittently, the fire-opal shows blue and green. 
there is nothing to be said for you. guard 
your secret. conceal it under your hard 
plumage, necromancer. 
o 
bird, whose tents were "awnings of egyptian 
yarn," shall justice’ faint, zigzag inscription— 
leaning like a dancer— 
show 
the pulse of its once vivid sovereignty? 
you say not, and transmigrating from the 
sarcophagus, you wind 
snow 
silence round us and with moribund talk, 
half limping and half ladified, you stalk 
about. ibis, we find 
no 
virtue in you—alive and yet so dumb. 
discreet behavior is not now the sum 
of statesmanlike good sense. 
though 
it were the incarnation of dead grace? 
as if a death mask ever could replace 
life’s faulty excellence! 
slow 
to remark the steep, too strict proportion 
of your throne, you’ll see the wrenched distortion 
of suicidal dreams 
go 
staggering toward itself and with its bill, 
attack its own identity, until 
foe seems friend and friend seems 
foe. 
it is made clear by the phrase, 
even the mood—by virtue of which he says 
the thing he thinks—that it pays, 
to cut gems even in these conscience-less days; 
but the jewel that always 
outshines ordinary jewels, is your praise. 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
i attended school and i liked the place— 
grass and little locust-leaf shadows like lace. 
writing was discussed. they said, "we create 
values in the process of living, daren’t await 
their historic progress." be abstract 
and you’ll wish you’d been specific; it’s a fact. 
what was i studying? values in use, 
"judged on their own ground." am i still abstruse? 
walking along, a student said offhand, 
"‘relevant’ and ‘plausible’ were words i understand." 
a pleasing statement, anonymous friend. 
certainly the means must not defeat the end. 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
pale sand edges england’s old 
dominion. the air is soft, warm, hot, 
above the cedar-dotted emerald shore 
known to the redbird, 
the redcoated musketeer, 
the trumpet-flower, the cavalier, 
the parson, and the 
wild parishioner. a deer- 
track in a church-floor 
brick and sir george yeardley’s 
coffin-tacks and tomb remain. 
the now tremendous vine-en- 
compassed hackberry 
starred with the ivy-flower, 
shades the church tower. 
and "a great sinner lyeth here" under 
the sycamore. 
a fritillary zigzags 
toward the seemly resting-place of this 
unusual man and pleasing sinner who 
"waits for a joyful 
resurrection." we-re-wo- 
comoco’s fur crown could be no 
odder than we were 
with ostrich, latin motto, 
and small gold horse-shoe, 
as arms for an able 
sting-ray-hampered pioneer, 
painted as a turk it seems, 
the incessantly 
exciting captain smith 
who patient with 
his inferiors, was a pugnacious 
equal; and to 
powhatan obliged, but not 
a flatterer. rare indian, crowned by 
christopher newport! the old dominion has 
all-green grass-hoppers 
in all-green, box-sculptured grounds; 
an almost english green surrounds 
them. care has formed a- 
mong unenglish insect sounds, 
the white wall-rose. as 
thick as daniel boone’s grape- 
vine, the stem has wide-spaced great 
blunt alternating ostrich- 
skin warts that were thorns. 
care has formed walls of yew 
since indians knew 
the fort old field and narrow neck of land 
that jamestown was. 
observe the terse virginian, 
the mettlesome gray one that drives the 
owl from tree to tree and imitates the call 
of whippoorwill or 
lark or katydid—the leadgray 
lead-legged mocking-bird with head 
held half away, and 
meditative eye as dead 
as sculptured marble 
eye, alighting noiseless, 
muses in the semi-sun, 
standing on tall thin legs as 
if he did not see, 
conspicuous, alone, 
on the round stonetopped 
table with lead cupids grouped to form 
the pedestal. 
narrow herring-bonelaid bricks, 
a dusty pink beside the dwarf box- 
bordered pansies, share the ivy-arbor shade 
with cemetery 
lace settees, one at each side, 
and with the bird: box-bordered tide- 
water gigantic 
jet black pansies (splendor; pride;) 
not for a decade 
dressed, but for a day, in 
overpowering velvet; and 
gray blue-andalusian 
cock-feather pale ones 
ink-lined on the edge, fur- 
eyed, with ochre 
on the cheek. the slowmoving glossy, tall 
quick cavalcade 
of buckeye-brown surprising 
jumpers, the contrasting work-mule and 
show-mule \& witch-cross door \& "strong sweet prison" 
are part of what 
has come about, in the black 
idiom, from advancing backward 
in a circle; 
from taking the potomac 
cowbirdlike; and on 
the chickahominy 
establishing the negro, opportunely brought, to strength- 
en protest against 
tyranny. rare unscent- 
ed, providently 
hot, too sweet, inconsistent flowerbed! 
old dominion 
earth makes sunflower-heads grow large; 
hibiscus and so-called mimosa 
close at night; the scarlet peculiarly-quilled 
pomegranate-petals, 
the african violet, 
and camellia, perfumeless. yet 
house-high glistening green 
magnolia-trees with velvet- 
textured flower, are filled 
with anaesthetic scent 
enough to make one die; as 
the gardenia is, though its 
two-toned green-furled buds 
and dark leaf-vein on green- 
er leaf when seen 
against the light attract no pigmy bees 
such as the frilled 
silk substanceless faint flower of 
the crape-myrtle does. odd pamunkey 
princess, birdclaw-earringed; with a pet raccoon 
from the mattapo- 
ni (what a bear!) feminine 
odd indian young lady! odd thin- 
gauze-and-taffeta- 
dressed english one! terrapin 
meat and crested spoon 
feed the mistress of french 
plum-and-turquoise-piped chaise-longue; 
of brass-knobbed slat front-door and 
everywhere open 
shaded house on indian- 
named virginian 
streams, in counties named for english lords. the 
rattlesnake soon 
said from our once dashingly 
undiffident first flag, "don’t tread on 
me," tactless symbol of a new republic. 
priorities were 
cradled in this region not 
noted for humility; spot 
that has high-singing 
frogs, cotton-mouth snakes and cot- 
ton-fields; clay for brick, 
lawrence jugs with persian 
loping wolf design; and hounds. 
here the poor unpoisonous 
terrapin likes to 
idle near the sea-top; 
tobacco-crop 
gains have church tablets; devil’s woodyard swamps 
and one-brick-thick- 
wall serpentine shadows star- 
tle strangers. the strangler fig, the dwarf- 
fancying egyptian, the american, 
the dutch, the noble 
roman, in taking what they 
pleased—colonizing as we say— 
were not all intel- 
lect and delicacy. a 
black savage or such 
as was subject to the 
deer-fur crown is not all brawn 
and animality. the 
limestone tea-table, 
the mandolin-shaped big 
and little fig, 
and the now disused silkworm-trees, imply 
amity; much 
kind tyranny made ha-has 
that kept back cows; clock-strengthened stocking 
and drooping cotton dress with handmade edge, mark 
tyrant taste; the song- 
bird wakes too soon, to enjoy 
excellent idleness, destroy- 
ing legitimate 
laziness, this unbought toy 
even in the dark 
risking loud whee whee whee 
of joy, the caraway-seed- 
spotted sparrow perched in the 
dew-drenched juniper 
beside the window-ledge; 
the little hedgesparrow 
that wakes up seven minutes soon- 
er than the lark 
they say. the live oak’s rounded 
mass of undulating boughs, the white 
pine, the agèd hackberry—handsomest vis- 
itor of all—the 
cedar’s etched solidity, 
the cypress, lose identity 
and are one tree, as 
sunset flames increasingly 
against their leaf-chis- 
elled blackening ridge of green; 
and the redundantly wind- 
widened clouds expanding to 
earth size above the 
town’s bothered with wages 
childish sages, 
are to the child an intimation of 
what glory is. 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
i don’t like diamonds; 
the emerald’s "grass-lamp glow" is better; 
and unobtrusiveness is dazzling, 
upon occasion. 
some kinds of gratitude are trying. 
poets, don’t make a fuss; 
the elephant’s "crooked trumpet" "doth write"; 
and to a tiger-book i am reading— 
i think you know the one— 
i am under obligation. 
one may be pardoned, yes i know 
one may, for love undying. 
walking among scepter-headed 
weeds and daisies swayed by wind, they said, 
"don’t scatter your 
stick, on account of the souls." led 
from sun-spotted 
paths, we went "where leafy trees meet 
overhead and noise of traffic is unknown"— 
the mind exhilarated 
by life all round, so stirringly 
alive. the root-handled cudgel 
with the bark left on, the woodbine smell- 
ing of the rain, 
the very stones, have life. little 
scars on church-bell 
tongues put there by the devil’s claws— 
authentic phantoms, ghosts, and witches, transformed 
into an invisible 
fabric of inconsistency 
motheaten by self-subtractives— 
now as outright murderers and thieves, 
thrive openly. 
an epigraph before it leaves 
the wax, receives 
to give, and giving must itself 
receive, "difficulty is ordained to check 
poltroons," and courage achieves 
despaired of ends. oppositely 
jointed against indecision, 
the three legs of the triskelion 
meeting in the 
middle between triangles, run 
in unison 
without assistance. yet, trudging 
on two legs that move contradictorily, 
irked by ghosts and witches, one 
does not fear to ask for beauty 
that is power devoid of fear. 
a bold outspoken gentleman, cheer- 
ful, plodding, to- 
the-point, used to the atmosphere 
of work—who here 
appropriate to the thought of 
permanence, says, "this is my taste, it might not 
be another man’s"—makes clear 
that stark sincere unflattery, 
sine cera, is both farthest 
from self-defensiveness and nearest; 
as when a seal 
without haste, slowly is impressed 
and forms a nest 
on which the raised device reversed, 
shows round. it must have been an able workman, 
studious and self-possessed, 
a liker of solidity, 
who gave a greenish waterford 
glass fool’s cap with summit curled down toward 
itself as the 
glass grew, the look of tempered swordsteel, 
and three-ore-d 
fishscale-burnished antimony- 
tin-and-lead’s smoky water-drop type-metal 
smoothness emery-armored 
against rust. its subdued glossy 
splendor leaps out at the eye as 
form dramatizes thought, in the glass 
witchball and air- 
twist cane. this paperweight, in mass 
a stone, surpass- 
ing it in tint, enlarges the 
fine chain-lines in the waterleaf weighted by 
its hardened raindrop surface. 
the paper-mould’s similarly 
once unsolid waspnest-blue, snow- 
white, or seashell-gray rags, seen through, show 
sheepcotes, turkey- 
mills, acorns, and anvils. "stones grow," 
then stop, and so 
do gardens. "plants grow and live; men 
grow and live and think." utilizey la poste 
aerienne, trade will follow 
the telephone. the post’s jerky 
cancellings ink the stamp, relet- 
tering stiltedly, as a puppet- 
acrobat walks 
about with high steps on his net, 
an alphabet 
of words and animals where the 
wire-embedded watermark’s more integral 
expressiveness had first set 
its alabaster effigy. 
in bark silverer than the swan, 
esparto grass, or so-called titan 
parchment tougher 
than hercules’ lion-skin—spanish, 
umbrian, 
eastern, open, and jeweled crowns, 
corroborate the dolphin, crane, and ox; sealed 
with wax by a pelican 
studying affectionately 
a nest’s three-in-one cartwheel tri- 
legged face. "for those we love, live and die" 
the motto says. 
and we do. part pelican, i, 
doubting the high- 
way’s wide giant trivia where 
three roads meet in artificial openness, 
am obliged to justify 
outspoken cordiality. 
firm-feathered juniper springing 
from difficult ground, the sky trembling 
with power, the rain 
falling upon the bird singing, 
modest printing, 
on honest paper properly 
trimmed, are gifts addressed to memory, and a 
gift is permanent, shining 
like the juniper’s trinity 
of spines. an unburdensomely 
worthy officer of charity, 
the evergreen 
with awlshaped leaves in whorls of three— 
successively 
firm. "on the first day of christmas 
my true love he sent unto me, part of a 
bough of a juniper-tree," 
javelin-ed consecutively. 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
first, we remove the dreadful yellow awnings from the shop-fronts in the square. 
brighten the streetlamps. play our instruments for the dairy cows crowding 
the fence. we angle for more daylight, fill out the appropriate paperwork. get 
down on hands and knees to clean out the ditches. we eat breaded fish for 
lunch, drink a cold beer, volunteer to play our part. no one complains of their 
dreams or dread. a mangy dog comes out of the forest covered in mud and 
stinking of deep time. belonging to the old owners, he wants nothing to do 
with us, knows we'll use him as a bridge: look, there he goes with a pheasant 
in his mouth. late october, the windows display ornamental gourds, tidy piles 
of leaves. evening in the forest, the eyes and mouths of jack-o-lanterns spark. 
a bark, a souvenir. way off the earth the moon muscles in, entirely invincible. 
who likely were reluctant to be brave. 
sitting by a slow fire on a waste 
of snow, i would last about an hour. 
better not euphemize the grave. 
in this fashionable town, endearments are the mode 
though generals are appraised—not praised— 
and one is not forced to walk about 
where a muddy slough serves as a road. 
"what are these shadows barely 
visible, which radar fails to scan?" 
ships "keeping distance on the gentle swell." 
and "what is a free world ready 
to do, for what it values most?" 
bestow little discs the bereaved may touch? 
can i ever forget it even when dead— 
that congressionally honored ghost 
mourned by a friend whose shoulder sags— 
weeping on the shoulder of another 
for another; with another sitting near, 
filling out casualty-tags. 
what of it? we call them the brave 
perhaps? yes; what if the time should come 
when no one will fight for anything 
and there’s nothing of worth to save. 
or what is closer to the truth, 
when i look at that of which i may regard myself as the imaginary possessor, 
i fix upon what would give me pleasure in my average moments: 
the satire upon curiosity in which no more is discernible than the intensity of the mood; 
or quite the opposite—the old thing, the medieval decorated hat-box, 
in which there are hounds with waists diminishing like the waist of the hourglass 
and deer and birds and seated people; 
it may be no more than a square of parquetry; the literal biography perhaps, 
in letters standing well apart upon a parchment-like expanse; 
an artichoke in six varieties of blue; the snipe-legged hieroglyphic in three parts; 
the silver fence protecting adam’s grave, or michael taking adam by the wrist. 
too stern an intellectual emphasis upon this quality or that, detracts from one’s enjoyment; 
it must not wish to disarm anything; nor may the approved triumph easily be honored— 
that which is great because something else is small. 
it comes to this: of whatever sort it is, 
it must be "lit with piercing glances into the life of things"; 
it must acknowledge the spiritual forces which have made it. 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 

