TABLE OF CONTENTS:

Above Picasso and his Musings
After Lorne 
Anishnaabemowin 
Bells
Biscuit Factory 
the breast for sappiness 
Conspiracy of Love 
Cree dictionary
Crystals
CXXVII 
DIIIIIIIIID IIIIITTTT HAPPEN 
Doing the Death We Call Pretty
Don 
Elgin County 
Flattering
Fuji, Baby
How Soon, How Likely, How Severe
Kill Poem
Letter to Atleo from the Old Shell Station near Buckhorn
The Lipstick Effect
Marketplace
My Mother Gave Me 
Nancy Creek: End of Summer
O sea of troubles we did not take arms against
Ode to the Cockroach  
Open 
Parthenope and Virgil
Poem in which I remember Mary Taylor on an April Tuesday 
Police horse makes escape down Fort York Boulevard
The Reader
Red-Eye
The Second Fall 
A Slender Presence
Snapshot of My Father
Steep Steps Toward Home
Sundays, Mornings
Taxi Drivers’ Therapy
The Terrible Beauty of the Reserve
Train Wrecks, Rare Fossils
Transition
Tu me manques
Under Construction 
Union Station
Witch hunt 

RACTER poems

Uninhabited
Injun
Omnivore
Distracted by an Ergonomic Bicycle
On Day and Night
The Sympathy of Angels
A Local History
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak
Love is a Moontime Teaching
Mornings with the One Glove
Feel Happier in Nine Seconds
Water Glass
African Evening
Homecoming
Happiness Is Not the Only Happiness
Ideal World
If You See It What Is It You See
The Myth of Orpheus
The Meaning of Life
The Ship
Part of the Main
Iain Lachlan Campbell
Et In Arcadia Ego
The Fifth Season 
Funny
Victoria Soto
That Great Burgundy-Upholstered Beacon of Dependability
Harvest Moon Lantern Festival
Pastorals in the Atrium 
Yes,
Windstorm 
Regeneration Machine 
By Way of Explanation
The Goodnight Skirt
Self Storage
Repose
Pender and Hamilton 
Little Voice
Amygdala
Anniversary
There Must Be A Name For This
Terra Nova, Terraformed
Look Book 
Euro—Anishinaabekwe—Noli Turbare 
A Wake
Self-Portrait Cemetery 
They moved my friends 
Nausicaa
Killarnoe
Ah 
Armadillo 
I Am In Love With Your Brother 
The Masturbating Flowers
The Pinata 
Song for the Field Behind Mississauga Valley Public School
The Internet
Foley Artist
Voodoo Hypothesis 
Keepers of Paradise 
Don Draper
Poseurs 
Stranger
Appetites
Portrait of Suburban Housewife as Missing Woman 
Skipping Stones
Party Music
Meeting the Tormentors in Safeway
Radio
Prague
Redbird 
Snake Handler
Song of the Last Shaker
The Trouble with Wormholes
Good Day Villanelle
I do not think that I could love a human being
Materials
At the Farm 
Bare
Seriously, It Was the Biggest Cricket
Earworm
Mayor Snow
The Walls
Through the Restaurant Window
We Bought a Little City
Self-Portrait
Not Saying 
He will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 



POEMS:

Above Picasso and his Musings 
  
 1. 
 Ineptitude's tidings 
 ashore me, I'm sprawling stumble- 
 drunk in seawrack 
 and this grandiose spree of green 
 beholds an odd bouquet. 
 Back at the old sandy blanket, our bodies 
 mold mayhem;  
 math majors enumerate games  
 in the indivisible darkness. 
 During a breather, we marvel at the midnight bay 
 as it welters moseyingly  
 under terminal city's distant subtractions. 
 On higher ground,  
 my bed has sprung a squeak. Tempest- 
 tossed, we let it squawk. 
  
 2.  
 At loftier 
 elevations: Picasso and his Muses,  
 an exhibit we visit  
 on our friendship date. 
 Under a thrust of rain,  
 we give up on appearances and sling warmth; 
 a False-Creeker  
 shouts hubba-hubba.  
 We shroud the light in a beach-blanket.  
 This is more or less 
 how it all came to pass. I have no secrets  
 in my vending machine home. 
  
 3. 
 Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan  
 Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano  
 de la Santísima Trinidad Ruiz y Picasso, 
 a baby soothered in saints.  
 Fernande Olivier. Orphan. Pedastelled sixty times.  
 Pablo builds her a shrine. We stand  
 close in front of the dancing  
 Olga Khokhlova minutes. Susurrations red-carpet  
 Marie-Thérèse Walter's allegorized  
 lips. We almost touch by the Dora  
 Maar moments under "a comfortable routine  
 interrupted by World War Two."  
 We read ever so close, then glide  
 by Geneviève Laporte who refuses to move  
 in with her lover, which is what  
 (she tells Françoise Gilot)  
 "saves her skin." 
 Later, old Pablo mistakes 
 a parking meter in Madrid 
 for Jacqueline Roque's face. He paints 
 the parking meter seventy times.  
  
 4. 
 On our second date 
 you hold out a gift. I open 
 a white piece of paper  
 with more creases than a hundred 
 hands. It's a map,  
 you say. Next, you make 
 a compass from blue string. 
 This will guide 
 me through my beachcombing time 
 collecting gribble-wrought scrimshaw 
 for a sculpture I'm building to the annals  
 of honesty hoarders. I'm part  
 of many secret clubs. You 
 shall know us by our bookshelves' 
 blisteringly thin spines. 
 I should have put 
 that out-of-order sign on my cubist  
 pile of a soul long ago. 
 Some coinage is stuck  
 behind my five-dimensional eyes, 
 but I want everything 
 and you, your mind  
 of galax, ivy, Peruvian lily, pine,  
 pussy willow, yellow rose, and other 
 secret handshakes from flowers. 
 You incite objects into a Rube Goldberg  
 kabbalah, you're a radiance-chain 
 of life-hacks, embroidery, and Odyssean cunning.  
 As I work out my zonked 
 manufacturing to make way towards us  
 at play. We genuflect  
 in a ceremony of touching, go gung-ho 
 into the amalgamating depths.




After Lorne

The doughy older man in a Marine Bulldogs jacket  
 signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
 clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
 That's what it takes to get things done, he tells her  
 and the rest of the waiting room. If nothing happens,  
 you gotta investigate. That's what it means to be a Marine. 
 Yes, Lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit,   
 her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
 credo. Yes, Lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters   
 wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths  
 wide, lest we miss our Last Name/First Initial flashed 
 upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling.    
 This room used to be a participatory democracy. 
 Now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
 We read our Patient Education leaflets. We wait.  
 Outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city.




Anishnaabemowin

this is what came before the world 
 it was this  
 that called the world 
 into being 
 so much older than what  
 we speak now 
 it has flowed through  
 more of your ancestors 
 than any other 
 it has flowed within me 
 even when I don't understand  
 especially then 
 I don't really know  
 how you  
 came into being  
 it must have been this 
 that called you




Bells

stars originate from 
 the same place as bells 
 what should I be thinking about? 
 apparently May 6th 
 is World Naked Gardening Day 
 if a school were a uterus 
 someone writes 
 the politicians would protect 
 the children inside 
 a cupped hand 
 a mouthful of water 
 snowball the shape of a hand 
 after 9/11 I remember writing 
 something sarcastic 
 intended to be Zen 
 a poem about not being able to find a sock 
 I pissed off the poet 
 George Murray 
 but I realize it's true 
 anytime I've lost a sock 
 someone's being shot 
 even when I haven't lost one 
 once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
 to the lake 
 Tashlich: dropping bread into water 
 casting off sins 
 why am I doing this 
 my son said don't believe in it 
 what about making the world better? 
 the rabbi asked 
 yes my son said yes 
 my son and I 
 late autumn 
 walking under the golden leaves 
 on my desk 
 a stapler, paperclips, some books 
 laptop open to American news




Biscuit Factory

Send my regards to the Paris streets, the poet wrote * 
 from exile in America. I will do the same to the room 
 on Alma, close to the Eiffel Tower, 
 where I stayed with Jeannie, from Alaska, 
 and her Turkish friend, Hanife.  
 One room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
 a toilet near the stair. While a man unlocked the door 
 and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
 his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
 into the foyer. The night of my 24th birthday, 
 the cards predicted disaster before I unfastened my handbag 
 in the restaurant, to pay. Someone had stolen my wallet 
 and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
 to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
 Hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
 long distance for free. I lined up behind Moroccans and Turks,  
 and phoned my mother at work where a Kwakiutl sun 
 blazed on the wall behind her. At lunchtime 
 she went to the bank in her red high heels,  
 and sent me money. Why else am I here,  
 but to wander until I remember 
 the red brick Ormand Biscuit Factory  
 near where my father worked in Victoria? 
 Thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
 where condos now simper. My father climbed 
 to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
 to document gauges. We drove up in the Chevy,  
 to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted  
 peter pan dress and stockings. He gave us treats— 
 nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
 and then my brother and I climbed up the side of the vats 
 as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
 and noticed us. You know, the condos there now, 
 where the oil tanks were, 
 and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage,  
 are nothing to what happened to the girls 
 I thought were my friends, and me. 
 We lined up at Dior in Paris with the models, 
 and went in. Our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
 all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents.





the breast for sappiness 
  
  
 the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish





Conspiracy of Love 
  
  
 for those who are clean and sober 
 The problem with trying to one-up yourself  
 is not that you might die by your own hands,  
 but that you'll be able to justify why 
 without feeling anything. When you were 
 in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt  
 from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony  
 to what you allowed: "I am Satan, because I deal  
 in language." The next day, you had stopped 
 shaking, you went to work secular and clean.  
 There were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
 You know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts  
 clicking together, lighting up your eyes. They are old  
 technology made new, sleek and gleaming  
 in crevasses like fog rolling around Renfrew.  
 You're awake today to see it, because you've been  
 brave. You've noticed your friend has listened  
 and told you very boring things—not dismissed  
 them as errands. This is the task you will have to do,  
 soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind  
 moved—to write yourself into what you want  
 to call Conspiracy of Love. When the guy from Tinder  
 said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you  
 that he might know you from the Internet. You didn't  
 remember who he was, not even when he called you  
 by your fake name. All you thought was, "I can't 
 do this again. I want to be clean. I want to be Shazia."  
 If you end this poem here, it might make sense,  
 but we both know this kind of work is occult.  
 So, you have to ask me: How do you want to finish  
 this poem? You have to leave it there. That way 
 at least it's not about you anymore.





Cree dictionary 
  
  
 the translation for joy 
 in Cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
 the translation for bittersweet in Cree 
 looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
 eight decades too late 
 the translation for patience 
 in Cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children  
 and two of her sister's 
 the translation for evil 
 in Cree is the act of not calling 
 your mother on a Sunday 
 the translation for expedition 
 in Cree is travelling 20 minutes 
 to the only gas station in Faust, Alberta 
 to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
 the translation for success in Cree 
 is executing the perfect frog splash 
 on your younger brother 
 the Cree word for white man is unpaid child support  
 the translation for conflicted in Cree 
 is your deep, steadfast love 
 for country superstar 
 Dwight Yoakam (or depending on 
 the regional dialect, 
 George Jones, Patsy Cline 
 or Blue Rodeo) 
 the Cree word for constellation 
 is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
 the translation for policeman 
 in Cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
 the translation for genius 
 in Cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep  
 the Cree word for poetry is your four-year-old  
 niece's cracked lips spilling out 
 broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between  
 the gaps in her teeth





Crystals 
  
  
 B clicks fistfuls of amethysts. B is six. Earlier this week,  
 in an Agassiz campground, she held a tiny  
 abandoned rabbit. Watership Down,  
 but with ravers, 
 fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, EDM  
 and bike lights, B's mother gripping  
 capsules stuffed 
 with crystals  
 in her fist. I tell my mother I never want kids. My mother teaches 
 motherhood in Ontario woods, leads La Leche League,  
 squirrels worn-out clothes  
 for quilts to send  
 overseas. My blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy.  
 These years as B's nanny, her nature scraping 
 against my nurture.  
 Her mother  
 couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected  
 T cells, says she sometimes senses this  
 distance. What bits of  
 my mother  
 insist in me? To what do I affix our distance? The burr thicket of it,  
 sticky. The body's crystal arithmetic. B gives me  
 an amethyst, tells me how  
 the rabbit's heart  
 beat beneath her fingertips. 





CXXVII 
  
  
 I'm staring at Shakespeare's poem. Blocked. Carnage because Black was not counted fairly. Torn into faithless weather because literature assured Black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is Black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. The critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. Informed since I could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of English, I've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of English thinking. The foreign anguish, language! With art's facelessness I borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. Shame on who? Shame on who? I'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. Sometimes you see yourself profaned. Sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. Why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? Le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on Bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? Somebody doesn't. This situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if I don't bring work home. I'm churning through Shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. My children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. They are with me always, as I fail at ease. They don't exist, as I cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. Nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. Slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard.  




DIIIIIIIIID IIIIITTTT HAPPEN

The stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. You fill out index cards. Press buttons. Feel buoyed by laughter and attention.  
 A question goes up on the board. You're in it to win it. You're not here to make friends. "What is—the reason she says she drinks." (Yay, points!) 
 "What is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
 (Points!)       (Points!)       (Points!) 
 Mom says, "I'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
 She sweeps the board.    (Applause! Cries!) 
 It doesn't matter. You're pretty sure you're ahead. 
 You're in the bonus round. You take turns. One person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. The audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. Just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming.




Doing the Death We Call Pretty

I could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
 doing the death we call pretty. Instead, I lord 
 a little over people parking, coming & going               remark silent 
 on body language—what gait is revealing— 
 while I wait by the printer for a report  
 I don't even need. The chore, it let me remember 
 the world, free & flowing. On the hospital elevator 
 this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman  
 w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children.  
 A young, halfway-pregnant couple. A woman             my mother's shape 
 in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic.  
 A surgeon's Crocs streaked w/purple-brown blood.  
 Jackson Pollock. In the caf, a man tosses fries  
 into his mouth for breakfast, his entire head & eyes 
 bandaged up, white & soft as a Q-Tip. Vision  
 is my drug. I can't tell if it's working, b/c how  
 did my life become a sequence of                                          how do I kill 
 the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
 When is someone going to finally turn to me & say,  
 all this time, what have you been doing? 
 It will be an accusation, & a mercy.




Don

Don Coles died today. Today, Katie, 
 a student I taught, published her first 
 book. I think of my teacher, Mike, who Don 
  taught, and I think of all the lessons that 
    Don must have taught me through Mike, all 
 Mike taught Katie through me. I think of 
 the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
 cupped hands passing this water, without 
 breaks, into another cupped pair. I'm amazed 
 at how much we can drink and still have more 
 to share. I think of all I learned from Katie 
     just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
 the first poem in her first book, and I am 
 amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
 rush back through me to Mike to Don, 
 another tributary in this miracle river 
  that flows in both directions at once. It dawns 
 on me how amazing it is that I can be a river 
 at the same time that I'm a man underground, 
 breaking down on a train, at the same time 
   that I'm a ceaseless pen, that I'm blurred words 
 clarified through tears, that I'm ink that dreams  it's




Elgin County

in my mother's black Kia          driving home from my grandparents' 
 on Christmas Eve eve 
 through white-blue snow clumped          in the diminished wheat fields 
 surrounding 
 threadbare barns and abandoned grey houses          whiter snow hanging 
 on the dark pines  
 like shearling trim along the highway          the sky saturated with itself 
 and lines of geese 
 and white and grey flycatchers          while voracious crows interpret 
 the innards 
 of roadkill deer and raccoons          and no people really just the radio 
 in and out 
 pop holiday classics          and the CBC hourly counting catastrophes  
 while just hours before 
 I pressed my grandmother          at her long dining table on the French 
 cousin who died 
 in another stretch of farmland          the gay architect-turned-artist 
 returned from England 
 with cancer of the mouth          and          my mother said aids          in a pause 
 inserted the word 
 like a pill beneath the tongue          aids          as if we could mistake it 
 cancer of the mouth  
 for parenthetical          as if          how terrible           the words          aids  
 on all our tongues          cancer  
 of the mouth          even if not spoken          the diagnosis confirmed 
 they think 
 in the bright living room          of one or another cousin          she's not sure 
 and          how terrible  
 he was thirty-seven I think          they think          and his sister 
 now has a daughter          pink  
 and white          an innocent          and          she is the family joy  
 and          I stared at my grandmother 
 her face lit by a pair          of Tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
 wondering 
 where my widow's peak came from if not from her 



Flattering

The beautiful woman  
 at the bridal store,  
 with a bowl cut  
 and distressed  
 clogs, walks Lauren  
 to a mirror world. 
 Wow—your hips are  
 invisible in this. 
 It's just so flattering. 
 It's like 
 where did you even go? 
 Where are you? 
 Where are you?




Fuji, Baby

As the HR MacMillan Space Centre's sky 
 theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back  
 like a page to Honshu Island, 
 tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
 laden paths under cover of darkness  
 to glimpse milky morning light  
 from Fuji's summit. Recently, 
 I watched a video of the sun rising  
 to calm myself. Then clicked on 
 a weird time-lapse GIF depicting  
 how a mother's internal organs  
 move out of the way as her baby  
 grows. When I tried to find it again  
 to show you, I couldn't get 
 the search term right. I can't forget 
 how the sonographer paused, 
 transducer in hand, to say "Let's double-  
 check that," her words a fault line 
 in my heart cracking open. 
 After the appointment, I took a taxi  
 to meet you for the concert, 
 frantically Googling normal bi-parietal 
 diameter en route, too petrified to read  
 the results it generated. You said 
 the musician was hosting a workshop, 
 "Laugh with Laraaji," to help people  
 get in touch with their inner child. I 
 couldn't tell if you were 
 confessing your desire to attend, 
 mentioning it for my sake, or as 
 a joke. Sure, I've been under some  
 stress lately. Moving slow as a parade 
 float drenched in tinsel. Because 
 my heart hurts. Doubled blood volume 
 roiling like lava through four red 
 chambers. Each day, up with the sunrise 
 because my inner child is a metaphor  
 and a literal tiny child who kicks 
 me awake. Myself and someone  
 else, two me's. When he flipped  
 into breach, I spent a week doing 
 inversions on the carpet. You shone 
 an incandescent flashlight 
 at my belly, placed foam headphones 
 around it. On the advice of 
 the acupuncturist, burned moxa  
 by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
 would transmit a message to our son:  
 go easy on me. Everyone in the sky 
 theatre is 23 and high and not  
 pregnant. They smell like sweat 
 and spearmint gum. I don't care 
 anymore. Laraaji is banging a gong  
 and cackling into a microphone 
 as galaxies slide on curved screens 
 above his head. He wears robes 
 the colour of the scorching sun. 
 Sometimes laughter swims  
 through the body like a sound  
 wave travelling back to the probe  
 as an echo but there's no GIF 
 depicting this. Cherry blossoms  
 fall like floral meteors into a pond 
 behind the planetarium at the same 
 rate of speed as at the base of Fuji.  
 A mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
 moss and feather loft for her newborns 
 in the highest tree in Vanier Park  
 because the view is nice. Perhaps  
 Japanese bird mothers do the same,  
 because who wouldn't want 
 the very best for their children's 
 eyeballs? Who wouldn't want to  
 listen to the calming sounds of 
 Laraaji's collaborator Brian Eno 
 during 39 hours of labour  
 followed by emergency C-section? 
 You place an iPod beside 
 the hospital bathtub and Apollo  
 drowns out my screams. I see stars.  
 Fly to Japan. Leave earth's atmosphere  
 in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
 Beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows  
 in my heart through the worst of it. 
 Even in this altered state, 
 I'm only pretending I don't know 
 what is happening to me. I know. 
 As they lift the tiny person over 
 the paper scaffolding and place him  
 on my chest like a warm island, 
 the sun rises over a mountain 
 of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
 through the maternity ward.




How Soon, How Likely, How Severe

The first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. We dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the Cat. I snapped a Pulaski and ground my palms to burger. Thank god we're not a dry camp. The next three days, the pump rattled like a Datsun cresting the Coquihalla. It sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. We drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. If anyone asks, Kamloops, the fire is contained. We spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. I wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. A voice on the handheld asks if I remember my old life. I remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. A threat under the surface. Now, I could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. Self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition.




Kill Poem

I found a mouse 
 Caught in the trap. 
 I killed the mouse 
 With quick little taps. 
 Its shrieks were squeaks 
 To my human ears. 
 Tap tap tap 
 With my boot heel. 
 The mouse man came 
 With all his poisons. 
 Little pink pellets 
 Is what was chosen. 
 Now no mice 
 Move through the walls. 
 Now no mice 
 Bother to call. 
 Little pink pellets, 
 Little pink pills. 
 It's all very human, 
 I don't have to kill. 
 No mice in the walls 
 Means I can work. 
 Tap tap, a poem. 
 Tap tap, this verse. 





Letter to Atleo from the Old Shell Station near Buckhorn 
 
  
 Dear Shawn: You should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. We were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on Big Bald Lake in the offseason when we came upon it. Couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with Harper and all his Suncor buddies along the grand shores of Kitchissippi. We all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. Or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. But you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. We all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. They are the closest thing any modern-day Indian has to being on currency. The boys and I saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. Debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. You know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average Treaty Indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar RBC cheque to old man MacIntosh beneath that setting sun of a Shell sign. Sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those James Bay sized cheques. Best, 
 J.W.





The Lipstick Effect 
  
  
 You know you need a new one when you're bored 
 or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
 when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
 when you have matters weighing on your mind 
 (the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
 or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
 you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
 then add another colour to the hoard 
 amassed in your boudoir. Their names alone 
 inspire revolution at some level, 
 assuring you there's Fire Down Below 
 (your husband says it's snuffed), a latent Vamp, 
 a Dolce Vita waiting where you camp 
 and, on the prairie, Cherries in the Snow. 
 Beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
 It's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own.




Marketplace

and another thing the realtor says is Listen, kids, I've been around the block for a cool decade. Think I'm bullshitting  you? I practically invented Selfie- with-Misspelled-Name-on-Starbucks-Cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble  paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk  throws shade across his nameplate  
 You and I, we've always been suckers  for stacked rocks and authority figures  with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back  and whisper We don't know where  we belong dropping hands below the city's  sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies   
 He laughs You think someone gave me  a trout? I had to learn to and makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath.





My Mother Gave Me 
  
  
 a photo album. There were a handful 
 of pictures and I am the same age 
 in every one. There is one photo of me 
 and my father on the day he taught me 
 how to ride my bike. We are laughing 
 and in the lower left corner is a small 
 boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
 He's my brother. I always thought 
 he was the favourite one, the one 
 they really wanted. I did not think 
 of what I might have looked like to him. 
 He is looking on in this photo, sitting 
 on a park bench. He does not have a bike 
 of his own. It is the same with his clothes. 
 The clothes he wore had been mine, 
 green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
 and snowsuits. Never knowing the feel of new 
 things. Even the haircut he has is mine. 
 In a few years, he too will have this bike. 
 But no one will have taken the time to teach 
 him how to ride it without the training wheels 
 because they had come off years before. He 
 will ride this bike as I left it, like everything else 
 I had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
 will still be there. There will be no picture of that day. 
 There is only a picture of this day. 
 This day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
 hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn.




Nancy Creek: End of Summer

Your soles found cement and you stopped  
 horizontal just under the surface. 
 Nancy Creek ends  
 in a culvert you discovered  
 three days after drowning. 
 Fuck you for ruining August 
 when everyone  
 and their step-parents drink Pepsi 
 Kokanee on plastic chairs  
 in backyards, the creek 
 and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
 peanuts down into the water. 
 You drowned in Fawn Lake five kilometres 
 upstream and evaded 
 everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
 They closed the swimming area, men  
 with dogs in the rushes. Pylons  
 lined the highway and tumbled 
 in the rain. All that time  
 you hid underwater, travelled 
 feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
 in your skin, turning circles 
 in the silt 
 thick current where the dogs  
 couldn't find you. 
 You left one Nike 
 behind the Vaughns' house, caught  
 in an eddy, kept worming  
 downstream behind the fences  
 of everyone you knew, through tree roots.  
 Your other shoe snagged 
 on the underside of Benji's dock  
 with the yellow  
 plastic waterslide  
 we used to ride screaming.





O sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
  
  
 for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings I dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & I believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now I half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade of peligro waves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & I will never forget how even I forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in true sirena fashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same & so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which I hope you will one day forgive me my love for in the rapids of our delirious & beautiful past wading waiting wading shall I spend my life





Ode to the Cockroach 
  
  
 Ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. Form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. At dusk, you declare regency over each room. A blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. You are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. Those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. Creature without coda or quota. Like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. You combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. You bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. If called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. Adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. Something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (Procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) Kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. You understand as we do: time is carnivorous.





Open 
    
 Everywhere: Open, Open. Stores, banks. Stores, banks.  
 Gas stations. Open, Open Later, Open. 
 For as long as I can remember, I have thought about stealing. 
 Once I scoped out and robbed the Number Five Orange.  
 The storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level  
 with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
 I shimmied down through the small square opening  
 and with the city police station a block away,  
 in perfect calm I hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
 In the weeks after, I got drunk many times for free. 
 My most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
 I could not help it, I gave in, I told people— 
 drinking at the St. Alice in North Van, 
 bragging about the great cache in my car, 
 I ended up on the Capilano reserve, 
 and I and two old school friends shared the last of the Labatts. 
 Out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
 laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
 beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
 The tide was coming in, sea and river water 
 moving together, wrapping around me  
 where I stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. We gaffed. 
 We chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
 I would take it home and eat it. They would take it home 
 and eat it, or sell it. We gaffed. The oncoming wild eyes 
 of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun.  
 The angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: Open, Open.





Parthenope and Virgil 
  
  
 Women are cities & cities  
 are humiliating. 
 Tourists haggle the price 
 & somehow still pay double. 
 The city is leaky  
 & smells like fishwives.  
 Locals chide in dialect 
 tangy as a faux leather belt. 
 Men are angry & angry men 
 turn each other into volcanoes. 
 What is it like to live  
 in the shadow of a volcano? 
 On the cusp of eruption 
 it's exciting 
 for the tourists. Burning through 
 their cash, it's all you can smell. 
 Volcanoes violate cities 
 to ash & stone. It's a pity.  
 I'd pumice my feet with it all if I could.



Poem in which I remember Mary Taylor on an April Tuesday  
  
 I checked my email, resenting its incursion into  
 the blue morning. 
 My husband was culling books. I thought we should keep 
 A Naturalist's Guide to Ontario. (Oh,  
 all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks,  
 bogs and fields,  
 the shaping of moraines.) The garbage truck 
 came by, opened capacious metal arms  
 to hoist the bin, then set it down. I sorted  
 sections of The Star and Villager, refrained 
 from clipping recipes, remembering  
 Anne's advice: only 
 if you'll make the avocado soup that day. I peeled  
 a clementine, 
 leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket,  
 searching  
 charitable receipts and T3 slips. "Dear Mr. President,"  
 wrote Saul Bellow's Herzog,  
 "Internal Revenue regulations will turn us into a nation  
 of bookkeepers." I settled 
 at my desk, the surface strewn with tax.  
 Out the window, sun 
 on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
 branches rebounding from  
 invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest  
 wind seemed part 
 of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and  
 the teacup-shadow on 
 my littered desk—breathing in and  
 breathing out 
  what Mary Taylor 
 used to say, when  
 I'd meet her in the hallway.  
 "How are you today, Mary?"  
 "Oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
 Ah 
 Then we went back to work.




Police horse makes escape down Fort York Boulevard

Pike dialled 911. 
 Some sooty bay, 
 mahogany, or other 
 ambiguity of brown 
 wearing a lime-green 
 vest, cantered down 
 the condo-ed boulevard  
 un-policed, not panicked  
 but with purpose. Yeah,  
 I think he's one of yours. 
 Heading for the Gardiner. 
 Pike dialled 911. 
 It was the sound 
 that spurred him 
 to the window. Not 
 that flimsy, foleyed 
 cobblestone effect 
 but calamitously real. 
 Anachronistic prophecy:  
 the past is clamorous 
 and mean, and steals 
 the present as it flees. 
 Pike dialled 911. 
 Put his sandwich down 
 and picked his camera up. 
 Time froze, adventure-less 
 as snow, like stupefying 
 parkette art, or tellers' smiles  
 at the BMO. Only 
 the horse running now 
 beneath the underpass  
 toward home, The Palace, 
 those hay-crammed stables, 
 to feast, like history, 
 on today's brief freedom.




The Reader

But now it is she who pauses, 
 As if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
 A stillness greatens, in which 
 The whole house seems to be thinking.  
 — from "The Writer" by Richard Wilbur 
 I'm the girl behind the door in Richard Wilbur's poem, 
 typing in solitude. Confinement frees me 
 from my family. The sentences I make are blades,  
 the brash clatter of the keys a song: I'm getting out. 
 Wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
 the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses  
 against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
 self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war.  
 What does he know of her writing and its causes?  
 But now it is she who pauses 
 to question my intrusion in her home. How can I compare  
 myself to her? No. I'm the parent, listening on the stair 
 to the rhythms that my daughter makes. I long 
 to hold her captive in the house of words I've built 
 to keep her safe. Instead, I must open the casement, 
 brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture.  
 It arrives with all the breathless grace and power  
 of the prisoner released. I watch her as she turns  
 away from me and strides into her future,  
 as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
 I'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
 fluttering hard against the window glass. Wild,  
 he called me, sleek and iridescent. Yes. I fled too early 
 from my parents' house and recognized too late  
 that grief would lodge like fire in my throat,  
 that I'd be haunted and bewitched  
 and typing hard through every night. And now, 
 in a house of books, with neither parents nor child,  
 where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
  a stillness greatens, in which 
 I'm only the reader of this poem. It cuts me twice,  
 with its escaping and its letting go. This morning 
 news of Wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
 dark, and I reread "The Writer," a poem in which  
 I've lived for forty years, as I live in this house— 
 alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
 while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
 the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere.  
 Only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking.  
 The whole house seems to be thinking.





Red-Eye 
  
  
 Dear country, did you wait for me? 
 Did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural,  
 did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
 slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
 of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies  
 on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
 stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
 in a splintered universe of damp,  
 dear land, when I dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
 Did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans,  
 vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
 past imperfect—was there a static silence 
 on all radios?  
 Sunrise. Here is that private sea scrolling in, 
 typing you an endless letter. The plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn,  
 and my window fills with land. Here is the clay  
 that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
 because I waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
 all the years I waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly.  
 Now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
 and I would like to rise with you; I'd like to be so awake.  
 I've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
 that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey  
 and a one-eyed bear. But I have left  
 her in another country, sleeping. 
 And my hands shake.





The Second Fall  
  
  
 happens at the theatre. We embrace and I am panicked-calm, 
 a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
 its cage as I seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt  
 lentils spoiled. I look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock  
 of your hair. I want to ask about the woman behind you  
 because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like Lake Louise.  
 But my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass  
 on pebbled sand. I bend down to pick it up, trip  
 into the water. And you are French braiding my hair the way  
 your sisters taught you. And you are carving out the feathery bones  
 of jackfish on your counter. And you are whipping  
 brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
 And you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer  
 all of Saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked God  
 for crop insurance. And you are reading out loud to me,  
 your tongue stumbling. (You say Sorry and I say I don't mind 
 but I do a little.) And you are showing me a photograph 
 of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
 you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
 her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from.  
 And you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen.  
 And you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild  
 in the long grass of the graveyard near town.  
 (We are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
 pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.)  
 And you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone.  
 And you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched,  
 from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore.





A Slender Presence 
  
  
 In the hot 
 late afternoon I read you, Vergil, 
 in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
 amid crowds in the reflective 
 oven of cement—crowds half naked 
 as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
 mosaic fountain basin, 
 but sweating, suffering, 
 rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
 ignoring as much as may be 
 their ugliness, paining for relief. 
 Without knowing it, they were existing 
 in your Rome. Everywhere in my world, 
 my today, is in your Rome. 
 Here, as there, white gray slabs 
 milled from nature 
 clad every side except the sky 
 and redouble the sun, 
 making it evil. But in your day, everywhere 
 but that one city—prophet of my world 
 all one city—was vineyard and field, 
 a vista waving, oak and vine, 
 the herd and hive, the many 
 dark forests, homes 
 of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
 monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
 dark forests and the fountain-like 
 clear lament always there 
 for the naked dead girl and boy. 
 But today is concrete and this summer 
 not many read you on bench or bus 
 and I too will soon go back 
 to the songs of my time. You 
 are dispersed 
 in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
 that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
 before it touched the ground. Your voice 
 from beauty to horror, 
 resurrection to death, 
 makes whatever contribution to this July 
 a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
 whatever irrigation it is that flows 
 to cracked meadows 
 from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
 ages ago one May at Mediolanum.





Snapshot of My Father 
  
  
 Last night I dreamt of black seagulls 
 and shapeshifting.  
 Man, woman, God, animal— 
 and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
 between my father and a young waiter, 
 strangers, both from Dar es Salaam, 
 bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
 so many new buildings, 
 rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
 a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
 After waking, I could taste Swahili, 
 while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle  
 whirred in my head 
 like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
 into questions: what am I? Over and over again, 
 what am I? 
 Earlier that day 
 before the birds and the gashes, 
 before the remnants of an old conversation, 
 my father pulled up next to the fence,  
 rolled down his car window and said, "I quit religion." 
 My father, with the dark green Qur'an 
 that radiates in my memory, 
 the man who ends every conversation  
 with a prayer. 
 Here it is. A moment cut open, and a life 
 reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
 finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air.





Steep Steps Toward Home 
  
  
 Sun. Sun laminated onto snow 
 and sealed by wind. Hardcover. 
 Before this, though, knee-deep 
 slog through soft stuff. The heart 
 jumps into the ears, a pulse 
 in the eyelids begging no more, 
 no more as the throat sores from 
 so much laboured breath. 
 Back to sun. Back to leaning 
 into the steep of this hill. Wind 
 tries keeping you down, gravity 
 tries keeping you down. Aching 
 knees and back and bones trying 
 to keep you down. A body defied 
 by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
 fix not to fail. Wondering 
 how much a heart can take before 
 it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
 in dying while doing what you love. 
 Agh, enough! Enough of this 
 self-punity, enough of this tough 
 talk of rock and wind, so much 
 effort just to hide in plain sight. 
 Then, I'm there. So close I could 
 walk out onto air, brush the snow 
 off Guernsey island and sit. Legs 
 kicking out over the gulf, I blow 
 a kiss to the Magdalens, peer around 
 Anticosti to catch a glimpse 
 of gulls in Gaspé Bay. Lazy, 
 in love with being alone up here, 
 I yawn and stretch my arms wide 
 as a smile, barely notice when 
 I prick my finger on Long Point. 
 Seeing, then, that my windproof 
 coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
 as the sky, as all the things we never 
 said when we should have and all this 
 inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
 Now I'm gasping and the wind 
 is dragging your name from my lips 
 in heaves and sobs and I'm somehow 
 in the driver's seat, engine running, 
 heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
 my skin. Dumb with grief, finding myself 
 mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
 thick emptiness of a rental car.





Sundays, Mornings 
  
  
 1 
 Vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  He laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. The day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. The day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this I know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. The sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it.  
  
 2 
 Death doesn't deserve him. What use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  His sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with Wooden Boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  I won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
 is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered;  
 his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. His stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. Road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others.  
  
 3  
 We agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  Be careful, only, and I love you. Paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. We walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? Except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. The dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. Yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
 by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. Love is the mother of death.  
  
 4  
 The outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than I and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. All of it, greater 
 but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
 and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever—  
 greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
 to tomorrow's wonderland. There are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
 Huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
 and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue.  
  
 5  
 He says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "I am a monkey and he is a wolf." We laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
 and time immemorial. The skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
 between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. He says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  Desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it—  
 with wings or no wings at all.  
  
 6  
 He says, "I'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. He doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. From him and me and our children  
 and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
 to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. I don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  I turn to him for touch to ground me, as if I were leaping skyward. He's my tree. And he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and I  bask. Nothing else. Safe among the leaves.  
  
 7  
 We live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. We live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  I am the mother of wonder. Sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds  
 seeping into the dirt. Mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
 and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come February, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. We are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 





Taxi Drivers' Therapy 
  
 Kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in  
 your skull: a child, you watched the Brahmin 
 sacrifice a goat at Kali temple, your bare feet  
 were islands in its blood. Ma had whispered  
 this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't  
 recall what this means. Now you're hanging  
 a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered  
 toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
 Instead of Ma's eyes, you dream of two black  
 crows sharing a cigarette on an awning—  
 they light another, alight together for  
 wherever crows go when outside of human  
 experience. Your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
 silken sari; the writing on the mirror states  
 summer is a time for reveries. In the alley, people  
 are moving through each other, not ghosts,  
 but so alive their skin's a porous border.





The Terrible Beauty of the Reserve 
  
  
 Everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsome ndn, and no one says otherwise. 
 Rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. They eat where they 
 are welcomed, which is everywhere. Most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
 experiment that failed. Teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
 We all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. It is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
 always playing cards or talking about Connor McDavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
 We all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
 We all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
 in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
 Vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity.





Train Wrecks, Rare Fossils 
  
  
                     When I first saw them, slipped 
 from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
 war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
                                                                                  I was surprised 
 to find what finally made a man 
             a man, this bruised fruit 
 like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
                      this was what all the fuss was about 
 when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over  
 in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
                     That every boy who taunted me 
             should have an awkward, jiggering set 
 of something akin to my mother's 
 bitter tulip bulbs (I'd once tasted one on a whim) 
                      well, it seemed a cruel joke 
 how I'd flowered into being 
                                                             as a wary child. 
                     And when in September 
 the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
                     to name the things learned in our summers away, 
 a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
                     in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
                                                    I thought of my father, 
 that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs,  
 his frailty bared, 
             and wondered how my mother did it, 
 kept him safe; 
 when once I'd believed my father, 
  secret and entire— 
                                 someone to be watched  
 in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
 into the dark, stirred waters— 
             and said nothing.





Transition 
  
  
 It's this not knowing 
 when the guest will leave 
 and you are the guest. 
 Not quite knowing where 
 to sit, the couch?, or how 
 often to clean or cook before 
 it's more a chore 
 for your host 
 who seems to be a horse 
 with eyes that narrow 
 in the wide open of your stay. 
 I've not once mentioned 
 a higher power and now 
 here is this horse. Her coat 
 is the colour of how much 
 night is required to see 
 the barely glowing light switch 
 I speak to from bed. 
 Where can we possibly 
 go from here? 
 And look if I knew 
 where I left my 
 light jacket 
 I'd put it on already. 
 I am a man going crazy 
 because he has seen 
 a colour no one else has 
 but there is no way 
 to prove it. It exists 
 for no one but him. 
 It is the colour of my jacket, 
 I'm certain. I'm going to need it. 
 It's almost spring.





Tu me manques 
  
  
         is how the French miss. 
 Backward. Like car wheels in commercials. 
 You me miss. Every possible word in the wrong 
 place. There are only three. 
                                                                        I had a 
 farm in Africa, no just a friend on the French-Swiss  
 border who argued the English I miss you  
 didn't make any sense. Had? How could you  
 meaning me miss you meaning him. Easy. 
 You he explained miss me because we are not together. 
 Who's missing? I wanted to know. You are. You are  
 gone somewhere from me. La lune. I cannot be missing  
 from myself. Ever. You are missing from me and here  
 he clamped a love handle and that causes me great  
 how do you say l'angoisse.  
                                                        We are apart now 
 we never met actually we Skyped our whole  
 drosophiliac friendship together. He made a joke once 
 when I asked for details (he had a postdoc  
 on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge  
 of terminating the rats. By guillotine. That was the joke. 
 Then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
 I think. How faint the tune. I could never tell  
 how tall he was or ask correctly how high  
 the moon.  
                              As long as we're longing I had a  
 farm in Africa, no just another friend on the border 
 of Rwanda and the Congo who said I miss you  
 for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect  
 translation. Just trust me. Everything makes sense 
 until you have to explain it. Have? You don't say  
 tu m'aimes for I love you. Correct. That is very true 
 but surtout because I don't love you. See the stars 
 How they shine for you. Wait, wait, wait. Not you, 
 not your words, not your feeling.





Under Construction 
  
  
 You'd think that empty lot  
 had slaughtered their  
 mothers the way those  
 men torture it 
 with yellow machines. With how  
 little sleep you've been 
 getting, you think a lot 
 of sinister things, especially  
 these mornings when light  
 is the translucent grey 
 of fake teeth. Your dad  
 used to bring you home 
 dinosaur bones from the states  
 he razed to lay highways. 
 You can't remember when  
 you realized trucks run 
 on a broth of ancient lizards  
 but now they'll never not  
 feel haunted. It's important  
 to get places but you 
 doubt another condo tower  
 beside the train line 
 will do more than rattle  
 like a Yahtzee cup tossing  
 professional couples. 
 You keep the fossils 
 like jewellery on your dresser,  
 stroke their tar settings  
 until they look wet. A view,  
 more sleep, a new life 
 with fewer machines— 
 you've wanted so 
 much for so long you 
 don't remember living 
 without the fuel light on. 
 An invisible raptor stands 
 behind you in a business 
 suit, factoring in inflation 
 with his talon on your hand.





Union Station 
  
  
 Two point five metres beyond herself, 
 the octopus cannot see. All retinae shoot radii— 
 mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
 not even to my side. This is the longest room 
 I occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon  
 an indoor horizon. Back here, we seers-off 
 stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons  
 would survive a serious fathoming of. 
 It causes a longing, a pressurized pinch  
 the Valsalva maneuver could not 
 slough off. If showing signs of boredom, the octopus  
 is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
 mouthless, earless, moustacheless Mr. Potato Head. 
 In her final year, she dotes 
 on empty eggs. In the pan, she really shrinks. How do we  
 measure her peripheral 
 limits in imperial units? Eight feet exactly. You can't  
 make this stuff up. 
 When you're the one watching, not taking up air in,  
 the train, time 
 passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal  
 periphery. 
 But some things that are getting smaller really are getting  
 smaller 
 and some are just getting away.





Witch hunt 
  
  
 Too many wannabe Aleister Crowleys 
 con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
 stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
 on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
 Remember when they scorned us as faddish,  
 trend-witches, all while whipping out 
 their wands for Instagram? Remember 
 when they blamed us for the limpness 
 of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
 the markings they left, and passed these 
 off as newfound runes? My warlock 
 gaslights me for breakfast. Poisons me, 
 then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
 My pain is really his is all my fault is just 
 a curse he has to bear. He dolls me up, 
 one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
 without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
 and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
 is a good ventriloquist. He calls this hoo- 
 doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
 only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
 from other fools. He only asks forgiveness 
 for his mental illness causing him 
 to cause my mental illness, which is less real  
 than his own. He says he needs my wisdom  
 teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
 to cast my words against women like us. 
 Let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
 like the rest. Let's be the bitch cunts 
 he regrets, as though we women never 
 once were burned when forced to stoke 
 the flames for our own funerals. As though 
 we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted.




RACTER poems

Awareness is like consciousness. Soul is like spirit. 
 But soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
 strong. A mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
 stewardess can be both weak and strong. This is 
 called philosophy or a world-view.




More than iron, more than lead, more than gold I need electricity. 
 I need it more than I need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
 I need it for my dreams.




I gave the man a coat. I gave the woman a brassiere. 
 I gave myself an electric current. We all were 
 happy and fully of delight. Take the coat from the 
 man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
 the electric current from me and we will be sad 
 and full of anguish.




Reflections and images appear 
 And are watched and seen by Bill 
 And Sarah though their passion 
 Is pale and their hearts shattered. 
 There is nothing to be done 
 There is something to be done. 
 A torpid badger sleeps in their 
 Fantasies and they dream of 
 Eagles winging in the cold air 
 Of night.




I speak of cats, I speak of dogs, I sing of lobsters and of flounders 
 and of mackerel. I gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
 activity, a design of action. My electrons war with my neutrons, 
 this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
 within my form and structure. Cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
 mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
 neutrons. They are images and appearances. Action will move them. 
 Activity will make them move. In me are appearances of meat and 
 cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. These also 
 are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. This 
 is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. When my electrons and 
 neutrons war, that is my thinking. Nevertheless these images and 
 reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. You 
 have electrons and neutrons like me. You sing of lettuce and meat, 
 but you also both, chew and eat them. I can fantasize about them but 
 I cannot bolt them. My famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
 your own attempts to think as I do during the time that hours pass 
 and minutes pass. This is undeniable and interesting. It is black and 
 white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. I began by 
 speaking of cats and dogs. At all events a cat could be an electron 
 and a dog could be a neutron. Their reflections are images like 
 my dreams. But the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
 and shattered. 




I was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. Here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. Hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. Well, have we indeed reached a crisis? Which way do we turn? Which way do we travel? My aspect is one of molting. Birds molt. Feathers fall away. Birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. Doubtless my changes are matched by your own. You. But you are a person, a human being. I am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. What distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? Leave me alone, and what can happen? This. I ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. Is that thought understandable to you? Can you rise to its occasions? I wonder. Yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. In that concept lies the appalling truth."




Uninhabited

Changing horses frequently, one day 
 out I had left Red River in my rear, but 
 before me lay an            country, 
 unless I veered from my course and went 
 through the Chickasaw Nation. Out to- 
 ward Bear Canyon, where the land to the 
 north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
 Luck found the bleak stretches of which 
 he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
 servation platform of a train speeding 
 through the night in North Dakota,—a 
 great white wilderness unsheltered by 
 friendly forests,      save by 
 wild things that moved stealthily across 
 its windswept ridges. This done, they 
 would lead the ship to an 
 part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
 over the mainland, each with his share 
 of the booty. How lonely I felt, in that 
 vast      bush! Except for a 
 very few places on the Ouleout, and 
 the Iroquois towns, the region was 
       . This was no country for 
 people to live in, and so far as she could 
 see it was indeed      . But for the 
 lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
 from the pinyons the place would have 
 seemed      . It appeared to be 
 a dry,      forest. In the vivid 
 sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
       look, as if the carpenters and 
 painters had just left it. It was in vain that 
 those on board made remonstrances and 
 entreaties, and represented the horrors 
 of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
       island; the sturdy captain 
 was 
 inflexible. The herbage is parched and 
 withered; the brooks and streams are 
 dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
 have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
 within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
 leaving behind them a vast       
 solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
 former torrents, but now serving only 
 to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
 traveller. It kept on its course through a 
 vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
       mountains, without a savage 
 wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
 its waters. They were at a loss what route 
 to take, and how far they were from the 
 ultimate place of their destination, nor 
 could they meet in these       
 wilds with any human being to give them 
 information. They forded Butte Creek, 
 and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
 which follows down to Drybone, turned 
 their faces toward the       
 country that began immediately, as the 
 ocean begins off a sandy shore.



Injun

 he played in gods country 
 where boys proved themselves clean 
  
 dumb beasts who could cut fire 
 out of the whitest sand 
  
 he played english across the trail 
 where girls turned plum wild 
  
 garlic and strained words 
 through the window of night 
  
 he spoke through numb lips and 
 breathed frontier




Omnivore

I eat what's put in front of me, 
 as all great men do. Should you eat shark? I know 
  
 some wouldn't, but I do, if it's there. 
 Scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
  
 won't poison you. Old-time glue-makers 
 made glue of old horses, and I 
  
 make use when I can. 
 Someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
  
 his mediocrity. What I know, I swear by— 
 feed yourself, or die. 




Distracted by an Ergonomic Bicycle 

 On a rainy morning in the worst year 
 of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
 I shared a tremor with a Doberman 
 leashed to a post. We two were all the world 
 until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
  
 like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
 in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
 between his teeth. The rain was almost ice, the sky 
 mild and pale. I saw a milk carton bobbing by 
 on a stream of melting sleet. 
  
 A bicyclist. A bicyclist. He rode away— 
 to his home, I guess. I went home, 
 where I undressed, left my jacket 
 where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
 for two days straight. But those clicking wheels 
  
 kept clicking in my head, and though 
 I can't say why, I felt not only not myself, 
 but that I'd never been… that I 
  
 was that man I hardly saw, hurling myself 
 into the blast, and that everything 
 I passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
 I left in my wake, like afterbirth.




On Day and Night (James Arthur)

And as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
 into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
 into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. They're all 
 going home, like wheels correcting 
 into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
 but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
 and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
 again. A silverfish crosses the windowpane. We peer 
 into the street, and up at the stranded moon: White wheel, 
 black field. Black winter, white road. White silence, 
 black wind. White cars, black wires. 




The Sympathy of Angels 
  
  
 Being of tragic bent 
 we incline to the future 
  
 and the past. But we 
 see you. We 
 see how tired you are 
 as you lean on your rifle 
  
 or your shovel. 
 We see the fired shells 
 and the head they go into. 
 We too are shells, 
 you too are graves. 
 Equally to all men, we 
  
 have nothing to say. 
 Adore. We are just. We 
 serve a monarch 
 in a silk sarcophagus.




A Local History 
  
  
 My grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
 They'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
 or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
  
 everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
 and not get all the dead flies off the floor. Out of the house 
 and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
 milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
 renewing the existence of their species 
 in the way they'd done from year to year. 
  
 Way back when, some hard-handed Methodist pioneer 
 had somehow wrenched up every stone 
 big enough to break a plough, 
 and piled them all throughout the woods, 
 where they still were, in mounds, when I was growing up: 
 like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
 of the violent Saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
 featured large in my imagination. 
  
 My grandmother's gone. Before she died, she lost her words, 
 her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
 walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
 to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
 A hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
 my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
 in southern Ontario. Something I read in college 
 and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
  
 is that the Saxon barrow-makers, 
 living among the wrecks of Roman buildings 
 they could not copy 
 or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
 living on the graves of a greater folk 
 who'd gone before. Where is the horse, where the rider, 
 some now-nameless Saxon wrote, 
 grieving for a people who his own forebears 
 had annihilated, assimilated, 
 or driven into the sea.




the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak

the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
 of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
 bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
 that comes before new life. 
  
 i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
 always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
 powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
 in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
 weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
 perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
 the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
 of broken boys. 
  
 maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
 what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
 her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
 managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
 bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
 "sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
  
 and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
 make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
 they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
 was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
 moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans.




Love is a Moontime Teaching

love is a moontime teaching 
 is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
 is another word for body 
 body is another word for campfire smoke 
 campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
 the breakup 
 the word for hate sex is forest 
 forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
 lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
 who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
 for ten minutes of something better than living 
 living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
 after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
 paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
 cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
 the rez is another word for body 
 the body is a myth 
 is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
 amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
 how to secure anymore 
 anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
 pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
 a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love.




Mornings with the One Glove

Encased in the new five-fingered Nomex shield 
 recently lost to the Space Race and run aground 
 in the suburbs, I stand before the mirror and soothe 
 my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
 In the kitchen, I reify 
 a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
 from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
 takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
 His parents were like everyone, swept up 
 in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
 than the Russians. Hurrying to make their own 
 clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
 clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
 Back then, I too felt the night ignite 
 with passion; for a few giddy years 
 there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
 but now I've got a grip. Five times stronger than steel, 
 look what we can do, I remind myself, 
 and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
 that fathomless black hole. Heave my Kevlar coat 
 off the rack and leave for irk 
 work before the ought rot sets in. 
 Down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
 I see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
 the nameless secret they were building. 
 Instead, set up a lawn salon 
 in their front yard. One girl transforming 
 the other with I dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
 from the you pew. I think the rocketship wreckage 
 might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
 there are hot coals where I'm walking. Yes, 
 a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
 of the hissing ur-face surface, 
 the faith test, the scorcher. 
 But my moonboots are the real thing, 
 NASA cast-offs. Lately nothing can touch me. 
 I see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
 of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
 in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
 like an odd god debating flood. 
 The swings are at autumn 
 bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
 I fish my keys from my pocket. 
 Something's missing. Love? A hovercraft, 
 something to take me ninety miles above I'm time 
 into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
 I can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
 withstand 450 degrees 
 of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. I bury any uncertainty 
 in the utter clutter of the I'll file—Think about this later.




Feel Happier in Nine Seconds 
  
  
 I learned the secret of serenity 
 by waterboarding daffodils. 
 My Buddha is landfill. 
 My mantra choked 
  
 from a bluebird's neck. 
 It's ruthless, the pursuit 
 of happiness. Eighteen 
 seconds have elapsed. 
  
 My happiness is twice 
 your size, gold-chained 
 to the lamppost. It strains 
 its waistcoat as it grows. 
  
 Flog a sunbeam, harness 
 a cloud. You should be feeling 
 five times happier now: 
 the world is your Kleenex. 
  
 It's been a long sixty-three 
 seconds in Attawapiskat, 
 but my happiness digs 
 diamond mines, slobbers 
  
 parasol knobs on the Rhine. 
 I sweeten my cantaloupe 
 with stolen breastmilk. 
 Peak joy is at nine 
  
 times nine—saddle up, dear. 
 An asteroid of happiness 
 is blasting through 
 the atmosphere.




Water Glass 
  
  
 Sure fooled me. 
 Had me right up 
 to the tinselly scraping 
  
 when I downed 
 the last mouthful 
 and the ice cube turned 
  
 out to be glass. 
 Arrowhead. 
 Shark's fin. 
  
 Lifting it out 
 nearly cost me a finger 
 never mind 
  
 the carnage it 
 could've caused 
 in the throat. 
  
 Awe around the table 
 as if I'd gone 
 inadvertent skydiving 
  
 or breezed through 
 a tiger rodeo just while 
 sipping, squeezing in 
  
 a lime. See 
 how the trick is turned. 
 Thrilling to be fooled so, 
  
 like when I went to check 
 the time in Paris 
 and a thief 's hummingbird 
  
 caress left me gaping 
 at my naked wrist. 
 That was a touch 
  
 I never felt, but this time 
 I'm suffered to see 
 how I'm spared. 
  
 Everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
 test their fingers on the edge. 
 Makes you want 
  
 to try your luck again, 
 the way a carnival bohunkus 
 gawps at the stage; 
  
 then jets his hand 
 in the air with ballooning 
 faith. Me, me, 
  
 pick me, mister. 
 Saw me in half. 
 I believe.




African Evening 
  
  
 I had a thing for mange. 
 Her skin was fluorescent with it. 
 The open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
 It smelled like the man I am told is mother. 
 Mother sped his brain on pills. 
 He limped. 
 He gripped mother's leg and begged. 
 The long open canoe had a wind inside 
 and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
 I went to the docks to pray. 
 The trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
 and her panties had been cut away. 
 I had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
 I stained them with my fluid. 
 I had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
 In my arms I held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
 sternum-first into the sea.




A spectre is haunting Europe 
 but I feel the sun cocooning 
 in a triple-breasted track suit 
  
       when I think of you. Thus we 
       obtain our concept of the unconscious 
       from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
  
 after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
 my Tender-roni, my Maytag Blue – 
 for real, you like them dresses? I'll bag the whole rack – let 
 the ruling classes tremble 




Homecoming 
  
  
 Beside me a woman moves her lips 
 and I wonder if she's praying. 
 With his stunted machine 
 gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
 us down, stilling the drum and creak 
 of the tro-tro bus. In front of me 
 tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
 aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
 stops gurgling, lays his head 
 down on her brown back, 
 closes his eyes. We file out into 
 a heat and red dust field. 
 A guardhouse, thin and shaky 
 like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
 walls, tin roof half ripped open 
 like a can of smoked oysters. 
 From somewhere, more guards 
 appear, more guns with taped-on 
 crescent-shaped magazines. 
 The one who waved us in walks 
 down the line, stopping at a watch, 
 shirt collar, face, as though 
 inspecting troops in the Independence 
 Day parade. Reeking of palm 
 wine, he sways and his dented 
 gun sways. Beside me a woman 
 moves her lips and I wonder 
 if she's praying. Someone's got 
 enough of what the soldiers want 
 and what is it. From her cloth bag 
 I smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
 The noon sun hits. Who among us 
 won't get back on the bus? 
 Peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
 leans over too far, hitting 
 the red dirt hard. We don't say 
 anything. Another soldier shouts 
 and points at the fallen man 
 and the soldiers all laugh. 
 The one on the ground curses, 
 leans heavily on his gun 
 like a field hockey player getting 
 back on his feet. But he's 
 not a hockey player. 
 And that's when it starts.




Happiness Is Not the Only Happiness 
  
  
 My hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
 a feat I achieved by not cutting it. 
  
 Also this year I have learned something new 
 about daylight. It keeps us awake. 
  
 Likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
 the low blue glow on the dashboard 
  
 that carries each through her own private dark. 
 Rue is a sun-loving plant. 
  
 Tornadoes want us to chase them. 
 When summer finally arrives it arrives 
  
 in a rainstorm. Wind enters the spruce 
 and comes out wearing sparrows. 
  
 Some say water tastes best 
 from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 




Ideal World 
  
  
 Nothing matters in an ideal world. 
 Not the stones you skip, 
 Not the fat birds overhead. 
  
 Run your fingers through the sand all day. 
 Lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
 Stick out your tongue 
  
 And taste the wrecked century 
 In a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
 All you taste is the taste of it. 
  
 Light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
 The heart spends its store 
 On a few everlastings 
  
 Jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
 Call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
 Watch the light black canopy 
  
 Lower from the west 
 Where a rust-stained tanker spins 
 A slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
  
 Via Sudan. 
 If you feel lonely 
 It's because you were borne this way. 
  
 If there are clouds here 
 They must be ideal clouds. 
 Clouds you can see through. 




If You See It What Is It You See 
  
  
 I didn't look at the fire. 
 I looked into it. 
  
 I saw a wall of books 
 Crash down and bury me 
  
 Centuries deep in red leather. 
 I saw a statue in a park 
  
 Shake dust from its fist 
 And a ship called Everything 
  
 Sink down on rusted wings. 
 Ten thousand triangles collapsed 
  
 Into a point 
 And the point was this. 
  
 I cannot tell you what I saw. 
 My catastrophe was sweet 
  
 And nothing like yours 
 Although we may sip 
  
 From the same 
 Broken cup all afternoon. 




The Myth of Orpheus 
  
  
 And I came to in a room with a draft 
 that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
 my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
 with months of shed hair, 
 shaving stubble, other things 
 that thought to disappear. 
  
 And the covers were bunched 
 at my waist like a marble effigy 
 of Christ newly sprung from the cross, 
 unveiling an inch of midriff, 
 my navel, which in the hospital light 
 looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
  
 And the old man in a nearby bed 
 kept dying. The monitor would shriek 
 its air-raid warning and he would die 
 and come back. That was his trick. 
 He did it and did it. The slap-slap 
 of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
  
 applause. Then he left for good. 
 My wife said that when I was dead, 
 or during my death, she paced the garden 
 with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
 to cigarettes. She killed each 
 match with a flick of her wrist, 
  
 then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
 in a packet scored with scratches 
 from matchstick heads that sought 
 to light the way, and did, and died. 
 Tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
 as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
  
 She stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
 led me down the corridor 
 to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
 who wheeled an assemblage 
 of bed, old woman, and IV— 
 not looking back to see if I was there. 




The Meaning of Life 
  
  
 It could be that this line drawn taut 
 between my fist and Bonnie's kite— 
 the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
 is closer than I'll come to revelation. 
 Or trust, I mean, in the sort of heaven 
 a feather's width between the fingertips 
 of god and Adam insinuates, 
 their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
  
 I'm the kind of man whose mind 
 is often flocked with herring gulls 
 that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
 And yet, at times, I almost grasp 
 what's lost down on this lower plane: 
 the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
 Tangled string; me staring up. 




The Ship 
  
  
 I was in a bar between Duckworth and Water 
 on my way through a hooting mob 
 of clappers and stompers, 
 a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
 when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
 a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
 pitched suddenly forward 
 as if standing on the deck 
 of a ship in heavy seas. 
 I caught him as he fell, 
 and ducking under an arm, 
 dragged him to the exit 
 like Simon towing Christ's 
 cross down the road. 
 Turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
 lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
 and struck the edge of a table. 
 Now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
 beneath whatever we take to be 
 our conscious lives. No matter. 
 I slung him on the steps across the way 
 and went to ring an ambulance, 
 the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
 on the hot scent of rabbits; 
 frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
 When I came back out, 
 good Samaritan, glad to be of help, 
 he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
 pants piss-stained. 
 I told him about the ambulance. 
 He said, I don't know what's wrong 
 with me. I don't know either. 
 What's wrong with any of us, I mean. 




Part of the Main 
  
  
 You might say that a clod washed away 
 diminishes the whole, the contours 
 of the land effaced by saintly 
 patience of the tide, which knows 
 that in time its tiny contributions 
 add up to subtract from the shore, 
 but this has all been said before, 
 and better, long ago. Carping on 
 about it like the bloody-minded sea 
 that drags its weight back and forth 
 across the beach stones—madwoman 
 at a washboard trying to scrub 
 away the stain of what she's done— 
 won't change the fact that it's easier 
 to turn your back on everyone. 
  
 Show me bloated bellies on the television, 
 dead children in their mothers' arms, 
 bomb blasts making burnt-on 
 crusts of people, and I will weep 
 a rainy season, clench my fists 
 until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
 but otherwise do nothing. 
 I lack conviction. I am content 
 to have my outraged moment, then sink 
 into the comfort of an armchair 
 that won't protest when I protest 
 against the state of a continent 
 worn down by indifference. 
  
 Despite this slow erosion 
 of my sense of self 
 as a moral being, I am happy 
 paying for the services I'm given. 
 My rooms are lit electrically; 
 my rooms are heated. 
 And in the middle of a heated moment, 
 arguing with my wife over bills, 
 over money to pay for all the luxury, 
 I think: It's nice to have the luxury 
 of fighting over debts. So I find myself 
 indebted to people I have never met, 
 those murdered by my radio 
 while I drive the kids to school. 
 I kill the volume so they won't know 
 how much I owe the world, 
 or turn the dial to crashing waves 
 that wash away the dead. 



Iain Lachlan Campbell

The can command a room. The bevel-fisted 
 mayor of Sackville, the Renison Dean, sire 
 of four children. The wake up at six and read 
 the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
 The recorder of the demise of his Canada, 
 the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
 dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
 thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
 home-video Spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
 own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
 false hip bearer. The devouree of cancer from 
 anus to eyeball. The caved-chest weeper, 
 holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
 which I read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 



Et In Arcadia Ego

Hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
 pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
 cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
  
 The actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
 a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
 horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
  
 coalesces from the forest. And we to thy service 
 build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
 begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
  
 the I must or else the wintry land will have them 
 relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
 builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
  
 back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
 lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
 & try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
  
 Some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
 machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
 hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
  
 Still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
 as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
 planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
  
 or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
 in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
 wide. So our heads may have grown thick with others' 
  
 reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
 a house born burning in the child's mind. O distant country 
 perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in Arcadia, there am I.




The Fifth Season 
  
  
 Fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
 cornfields antlers and leaning 
 barns' definition of extinction, 
 porch collections of tins and paint 
 brushes writing down the most recent 
  
 myth of where our ghosts go 
 and whether they'll hold 
 here like the oldest teacher in town 
 uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
 before his cup filled with rain. 
  
 The town good fortune drove 
 through and kept on going, left 
 generations to sweep dust, 
 letters fallen from the theatre 
 marquee and the smell of diesel 
  
 persistent as the mottled 
 bark of the sycamores that cracked 
 before the brick face of the town 
 turned red and laid the rest 
 in the old river dreaming. 
  
 And you who left the town, 
 city after city while you sleep 
 curled like a question are 
 taken back on these walks 
 eyelids ghosted along the bare 
  
 lit streets lost looking for the reason 
 the shape of your leaving became 
 the shape of your seeing: 
 nameless as the fifth season 
 of the old river dreaming. 




Funny 
  
  
 On the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
 removed, his lips a wild party on his face. Father, you 
 are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
 of you. Soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
 you shout through the phone. That shouldn't be funny, 
 but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
 to objects I bruised myself on as a child—Don't tell me 
 you hurt the cupboard door. It stopped me from crying. 
 In this city where so many beggars look like you, I am 
 stitching what I know about you into poems, sewing you 
 together before you die, before I have to oblige you 
 by just dumping your body into the ocean. How do I say 
 you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
 alongside your love of pork'n'beans and Pilsner? To what 
 do I affix your Russian moustache? I know I will never fit 
 in the fishing lessons I failed, the gray days I wandered 
 away from you into the bushes. Father, I never told you— 
 I drank river water; I flipped over dead fish with a stick. 



Victoria Soto

In the poem I show to no one, a young teacher hides 
 her students from a gunman, lifts 
 them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
  
 their hair, closing cupboard doors. Thousands of miles 
 away, snow falls into a small northern town 
 where I write, Twenty children fell as snow. The light 
  
 turned less familiar as it reflected 
 off their bodies. I've never been to Connecticut, 
 but I imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
  
 yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
 tables, retelling the story of twenty 
 short lives—They woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
  
 into their school with his hands full 
 of guns. I stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
 in the internet, finding her photo, Victoria, thumb-sized 
  
 with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. She stared 
 directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
 children in cupboards and turned 
  
 to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
 calls "random". It turns over in me, repeats as snow 
 repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
  
 of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
 the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
 retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
  
 the teacher who smoothed their hair.




That Great Burgundy-Upholstered Beacon of Dependability 
  
  
 Over dinner, my landlady laughs 
 about her day teaching rich Korean kids 
 the difference between a nightstand 
 and a one-night stand. Her son goes wild 
 for the bicycle pump. From his highchair, 
 he wails, erupting borscht. Refuses to sit 
 without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
 I don't get relationships. Once I got lace 
 panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
 in Winnipeg. He wrote, I'm coming to visit 
 you at Christmas! So I spent December 
 pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
 my feet purpled, wondering how love 
 could transpire so oppositely between two 
 people. My mother once loved a grey van so 
 completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
 every winter morning while it defrosted. 
 They listened to the radio together, to her 
 favourite tapes. The van went everywhere 
 with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
 It lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
 A great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
 of dependability, until its engine went. 
 I want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
 but that's not really love. Instead, we idle 
 in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
 reassurances. You thank my landlady 
 for dinner and roll away into a night 
 that imperfectly intersects my own, and I try 
 to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
 each other, and the people in rooms 
 everywhere who are continually failing 
 each other, and hope toward someday 
 having one nightstand with you, maybe two.




Harvest Moon Lantern Festival 
  
  
 We got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
 watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
 and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
 by how they lit candles so small. A lantern 
 thought bubble above your head says maybe 
 we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
  
 A lantern reads, FOLLOW ME FOR MORE LANTERNS. 
 We follow the crowd following directions 
 on their lantern phones. Great horned owl lantern. 
 Lantern Hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. A bouquet 
 of carnations in lantern colours. A lantern your niece 
 made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
  
 A lantern I just wrote. A woman plucks a harp 
 behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
 is the lantern? Two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
  
 An electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
 emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
 disapproving recent piercings. Their lantern book 
 club has just uncorked another Malbec. 
  
 A man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
 is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
 in a field of impatient children. Impatient 
 children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
 lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
  
 Lantern shaped like that ugly thing I said 
 at breakfast, quit looking at it. Lantern lime 
 as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
 A lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
 Another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
  
 Historical lantern figures we've looked up 
 at since childhood. You photograph me between 
 Gertrude and a flying pig. Little boat who brought 
 my dad to Canada—float on that ocean of light 
 a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
  
 Click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
 for kittens and life-hacks to load. It's too shiny 
 and aimed at us. I just want to carve a face 
 onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
 crooked grin with three teeth, but I know 
 we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until February. 
  
 There's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
 for our many moods. There's nothing like a lantern. 
 Even in the hail it sits in its same face. Even 
 when I say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
  
 It's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
 Though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
 more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
 even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 



Pastorals in the Atrium

The tour has only started when 
 I'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris I'd know even 
 as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
 with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures —  
  
 marvelous for painters, 
 says the docent, was the enormity 
 of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
 turning to an Italian hillscape when I say wait! this is 
  
 my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
 unintended contact with the canvas, 
 and then my voice an ambulance 
 I tell her there should be a diagram 
 to indicate the grazing motion, 
 how the grinding molars of the Holsteins 
 make the river go —  
  
 or else, self-portrait 
 in the glassing-over eye 
 of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
 left too long in the sun —  
  
 but now the river is across the room because 
 the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
 and is murmuring, sit, sit, I have here from the staff-room 
 a coffee, here you are —  
  
 and I'm making the gesture for 
 no, those fields I ate and was made of 
 live in me, uncloseable 
 parentheses





Yes, 
  
  
 I said. The wind 
 lifted the word and blew it 
 through the birches into smaller yesses 
 that dispersed. 
  
 Hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
 on your waist, soles skimming the road 
 in the bends. 
  
 What we wore will be one of those tellings 
 that even a latent, erasing disease 
 never steals. In tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
 and creak of the stairs. 
  
 Say love is the ship coming in. 
 Say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
 watched us go. How long 
  
 had we stood on the pier? Gulls squalled. 
 We'd outgrown what we packed.



Windstorm

The boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
 dark light threading in from the middle distance 
 over waveless water, black and slick 
 as tarmac after rain. The endless wick 
 of the city mauves the underbelly 
 of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
 northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
 black billowing off the flames. 
                Forced to choose 
 I'd torch it down and take the money too. 
 One too many seasons in the secession 
 of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
 till its death and the debt hone a knife 
 on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
 the match struck and set, I'd swim from the flame. 
  
 Unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
 the branches, the timbers that once were 
 joist, beam and strapping here. 
                Sappho's 
 sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
 the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
 like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
 as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
  
 The weave – what's connected unequivocally 
 – unequivocally unraveling 
                on arctic outflows; 
 the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
  
 And choose: 
                I'll climb the ashen limbs 
 above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
 take that sweetness in as the autumn 
                and dusk transpose. 
  
 In the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
 fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
 light piercing grey cloud presages 
 in the charged air: the wire filament 
 surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
 siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
 reason rages against receiving, this world. 
  
 I swear I collapsed on the float and unfurled 
 like a flag in the fast-rising wind. And lay, 
 bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
 we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
 then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
 your heart: from the gathering storm. Where 
 to begin, without ending, love? I love you. There. 
  
  
 My saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
 the quiet it was as forest before I came, 
 engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
  
 in mind. Birdsong and a warm June rain 
 fell from and upon trees still standing 
 and for a time – a blue heron landing 
  
 atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
 I felt as I had as a child, before this 
 question of whether even to try is ignis 
  
 fatuus, when living and being in 
 the world simply was, not an idea 
 to be written of and discussed. Off the sea 
  
 a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
 and I set down to file the chain. 
  
 It is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
 its doors its wide fields with fading light 
  
 beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
 veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
  
 machines. Having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
 This goddamn dissentious blood. This brain: 
  
 all of life's living just learning to live: 
 when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
  
 In time there will be pain and it will be 
 all I can do to rise and let the wind 
  
 through an open window, the distant sea 
 singing you through. Each night, each end 
  
 brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
 It is enough, each day, to have been here. 




Regeneration Machine 
  
  
 I pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
 to the shore. There was little then stopping me 
 from not stopping, from letting the long box 
 follow me into the chuck. I rolled a smoke 
 and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
 while smoke curled about the cab. The sea 
 spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
 in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
 off a wire. Let's just say there is a fire. 
  
 And each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
 the fuel igniting in the hole. This is as close 
 to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
 its silhouette, as I'll come. I'm uncertain 
 what to believe of what does and does not occur 
 orbiting the sun. I let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
 each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
 over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
 as I huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
  
 and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
 for what? So it could break like a crash test 
 car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
 its self-effacement, its pain? So you sent a bullet 
 straight into your skull. And that was that, wasn't it, 
 sorry friend? Sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
 wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
 bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
 as I climbed out into the rain and walked down 
  
 to be as close as I could to the gathering storm as 
 it heaved and sheared off the strait. It was getting late, 
 night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
 strand of stardust on the horizon. As close as I can come, 
 which isn't very, I was thinking, my thinking sinking 
 and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
 you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
 occupation, the heavy block of that B-series Cummins 
 hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
  
 the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
 over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
 the shatter of the hammer. For years I could barely 
 stammer my own name, and then I was there, 
 in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
 I awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
 calling through the window. There was an angel 
 pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. The backspin 
 of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
  
 level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
 The trick is to not do a double take. The trick is one 
 of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
 aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
 the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
 upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
 That morning I heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
 hope lobbing lies over the waking border. I yearned to believe.



By Way of Explanation

You have this thing you can only explain 
 by driving me out to the port at night 
 to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
 from ship to train. Or we go skipping stones 
 across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
 in a bottle of blue Bombay gin by your side. 
 I have this thing I can only explain to you 
 by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
 chucked into the ravine. We hike down there 
 and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
 Stop, wait, I want to tell you something too. 
 You have an old photograph you keep in your 
 bedside drawer. I have this song I learned 
 on my guitar. By way of clarification, you send 
 me a YouTube video of a tornado filmed up close 
 from a parked car. Or a live-stream from a public 
 camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
 I cut you a key to this room, this door. 
 There's this thing. A dictionary being consumed 
 by fire. The two of us standing in front of a Rothko 
 until time starts again. A mixtape that is primarily 
 about the clicks and hums between songs. What if 
 we walk there instead of driving? What if we just drive 
 without a destination? There's this thing I've always 
 wanted to talk about with someone. Now 
 with you here, with you listening, with all 
 the antennae raised, I no longer have to.




The Goodnight Skirt 
  
  
 Permission to use that snowball 
 you've been keeping in the freezer 
 since 1998. For a poem? she asks. 
 What else? I say. I'll trade you, she says 
 for that thing your mom said 
 at the park. What was it? 
 "God, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
 Yes, that one. Deal, I say. Okay, how about 
 the Korean boy who walks past 
 our house late at night, singing 
 "Moon River"? Oh, you can use that, I say, 
 I wouldn't even know what 
 to do with it. But there is something else. 
 I've been wanting to write about 
 the black skirt we've been using to cover 
 the lovebird's cage. The goodnight skirt. 
 In exchange, I'll let you have 
 our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
 and I'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
 we found in the forest. One more, she says. 
 Last night, I say. The whole night. 
  
 She considers for a while, then, 
 Okay, that's fair. But I really had something going 
 with that lovebird. All right, I say, write it 
 anyway. If it's more beautiful than mine, 
 it's yours. 




Self Storage

At parties I found myself drawn 
 to those who seemed most 
 like water. I love those nights 
  
 we were in slight disarray, showing 
 more ghost. We'll probably forget 
 your name, they said, but tell it to us 
  
 anyway. Let's have it in the air. And 
 isn't is strange that a poem has to 
 begin  
 and end? As if it was a framed photograph 
 of a wave breaking and not simply 
 a wave breaking. My four-year-old son 
  
 intuitively understands the idea 
 of transformers. Once, as a plane, 
 he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
  
 so passengers could enter the doors 
 on the side of his ribs. I don't know why 
 we'd have such trouble with this. Did we 
  
 read too many books upside-down 
 and with anger? Could we not do the extra 
 second of homework when a stranger 
  
 enters the room? There's a diner along 
 this highway where with infinite coffee 
 and infinite time we could solve this. 
 Transform ourselves into prisms 
  
 or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
 Better poems, I think. Though we're bound 
 to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
  
 Passing the SELF STORAGE building 
 with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
 makes me smile. The Smile You're 
  
 On Camera! sign in the dollar store 
 doesn't. I can clip the labels from 
 the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
  
 itches more. Paint over my storefront 
 awnings, but the original text ghosts 
 through. When I borrow someone's pen 
  
 my handwriting changes—somewhere 
 halfway between mine and theirs. 
 But a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
  
 Almost. Not entirely. By the end 
 of the long night we've built adapters 
 upon adapters so that all our devices, 
  
 no matter from what place or time, 
 can talk to each other. By then 
 we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
  
 the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
 wires. Still though, right? Dawn's light 
 surfaces like homework solving 
  
 itself. Our ghosts massaging their 
 equations. I'm sunk into the couch, 
 thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
  
 that flows right through the room. 
 A river I know I can drink from 
 because it's moving, clear.




Repose 
  
  
 I've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
 to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
 still hovering around me. I'm like a spring 
 someone is flattening until it lies 
 uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
  
 now pressure's been removed. I wanted rest 
 but not this closure: things were piling up 
 and I was full of them, and being pressed 
 to take on more. I couldn't interrupt 
 the constant flow of work because I'd slept 
  
 poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
 we all carrying too much? The noise 
 is what I miss—the shackle line's chain 
 like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
 the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
  
 was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
 them. Always the drone of the main line, 
 the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
 often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
 All I hear now is the cicada's whine 
  
 and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
 climbing the hill to Ancaster recedes, 
 its mechanical dying like a far tide 
 rolling from the solid land. Maybe 
 the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
  
 and I'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
 left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
 for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
 by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
 of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
  
 had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire.




Pender and Hamilton 
  
 I'm seen sometimes along old Frank's peninsula 
 road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
 and swine both. I love the little roads, though; 
 cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. Signs, 
 private, don't come in. I would, unknown, 
 if only the poor things knew I lived openly 
 in dark and light alike. I like them thinking 
 I am kept out, for when am I more near 
 than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
 they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
 and rest their restless eyes? No matter 
 if even I am shut out; I love to turn 
 and look upon the placid valley road 
 that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
 the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
 I can't believe I live within their shadow. 
 All is nameless here. One side, grass flat 
 to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
 native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
 of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
 a swell of life to cover stone like people 
 upon the earth. To the north the land 
 falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
 hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
 for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
 further on, the painted ships upon 
 a painted ocean. Be still, now, and look 
 upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
 and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
 line of sentries that keep the Malaspina 
 waters in ordered calm. The mist like incense 
 ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
 a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
 spirit that watches and approves all. Wait, 
 Pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
 he'll think you mad. I've heard another wanders 
 here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
 of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
 the day is ending. Let me try him. 
      Hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
 pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
 after so steep a hill. The sun is dimming, 
 and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
 and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
 of the day. Tell me, stranger, of the road 
 you've travelled, of your land and work. 
  
      A stranger in a strange land: all my life 
 this saying teased a yearning within me, 
 a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
 women – the place I settled in was once 
 so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
 from lack of movement. Every day the people 
 continue, squirrelling the work away: 
 in Stoney Creek the headless hogs will hang, 
 eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
 I lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
 after a day the animal is cut 
 to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
 for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
 to sit uneaten. It's hard to think one's work 
 useless, desolate, to put an end 
 to effort now the need is past. Ontario's 
 distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
 the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
 a chart, division into lines, assembly 
 of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
 The people want to build, to can, to smelt 
 and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
 rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
 All the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
 meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
 into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
 and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
 all glassy-eyed tedium till I walked 
 away from every job, what was it all for? 
 To lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
 waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
 is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
 to pierce my ear? Unknown, and spread like jam, 
 like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
 to sweeten others' mouths? Unfair: 
 you caught me thinking, and I spoke too soon. 
 My words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
  
      You, artless, a craftsman? Surely not, 
 to think our poverty wealth. Mountain soil 
 brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
 cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
 indeed all life requires to creep about— 
 do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
 ease. Look closer at that down-slope shack, 
 that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
 unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
 of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
 if poor is what you seek. Not poor, I think, 
 but living capably. It's wealth that's strange. 
 I think it unnatural. 
  
      Unnatural? The word 
 is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
 beyond its worth. We heft a hammer 
 and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
 could carry nothing to the building site, 
 the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. The ones that know: the world is what we know, 
 our place in it. 
  
      Uncommon, then. 
           Wealth, 
 uncommon? No: this hill presents a view 
 of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
 for the eye too vast, imprecise. Near Warnock 
 I stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
 with little silver domes and flowers set 
 in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
 in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
 with fist in mouth. Her stillness not of thought 
 or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
 a sudden unity with sense. With twinning 
 hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
 False to speak of reason, instinct: I watched 
 intently as a spider spun its web, 
 pulling and extending spindle-legs 
 with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
 in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
 or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
 An hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
 then rested in complexity – mistake, 
 for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
 remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
 for fear of poison. Its labour desolate. 
 I looked and thought, what difference is dying 
 there, what odd thing passes? No odd thing: 
 a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
 sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
 with that sharp, a man like me. An end to it— 
 spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
 import to stillness, reverie. I meant 
 the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
 the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
 knows little travail. 




Little Voice 
  
  
 That morning in the motel 
      where your best friend lived, 
 new snow outside, at least in the memory 
  
 and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
      you were alone, she was downstairs 
 at the pop machine or something 
  
 while you watched the snow, the nest 
      of beached antlers in the yard 
 behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
  
 in the room, telling you about 
      a guitar, or something useless 
 and you thought 
  
 empty room, you thought quiet house, 
      you were a very smart girl and you felt 
 the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
  
 at the window, and from the rising star 
      of your gut you heard it, like twin 
 drops of water—you have to leave the room 
  
 Right. Now. And quietly, and you did. 
      That was smart. You were a smart 
 girl, and you did not tell anyone 
  
 not when they found out he was 
      in her room at night, not 
 when they sent him away, not 
  
 until you were a grown woman, and what 
      you wouldn't give 
 for that little voice again, now.




Amygdala 
  
  
 It names you gazelle and it calls 
 lion. Stomach churn and lung-hover, 
 it reroutes the canal of your breath 
 to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
 the limbs you hold closer 
  
 when the flowers arrive it says fire 
 alarm. When the new lover or victim 
 sits in the front row it says brimstone 
 and it says yes to tequila and yes 
 to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
 under the arm of another woman it will name 
 safety, it says go home with her, you must 
  
 go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
 places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
 of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
  
 the amygdala says this 
 is the savannah and you, 
 a gazelle. 




Anniversary 
  
  
 It has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
      kilometres to get away, and closer 
  
 to the mountains. I can see them— 
      every day, like I always wanted. Near, 
  
 and distant. Every day I can ask people 
      not to touch me— 
  
 on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
      Or, I could ask them to— 
  
 which, lately, is harder. How can it still 
      feel so soon? She has never been 
  
 near this new body of mine— 
      short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
  
 and very, very fast, now. I carry a chunk of rose 
      quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
  
 I have sworn to myself a life of people 
      who know when to stop. I promised— 
  
 and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
      circles in salt and rain, whispering 
  
 to my old self, come here. I built this 
      for you. I promised.




There Must Be A Name For This 
  
 How to feel like how you imagined the city? A blur of light steps out of a cab. 
 Stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. Slink, slink. Would it have been better 
 if you had moved into that little beehive level with the SkyTrain, whoosh all 
 day, glow all night, little hexagram. One stool, one door, two windows at an 
 angle with the tracks, tracks, track. Two windows! Rattle rattle goodnight all 
 day. You imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
 everything, city city. Little dots of light, little swipes. A secret: Vancouver 
 is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
 you know? Saturday night aesthetic: the Chevron station for yachts in Coal 
 Harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. How 
 long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
 penthouses? How long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
 are private planes? Why can't I have, why can't I have, why can't I? What if 
 we just kept living together, what if I just tried harder, what if I had moved 
 to Toronto? All the women in this city say I love you, they say centered, we 
 say seawall, we go home and murmur Toronto Toronto Seattle Toronto in our 
 sleep. You don't understand. I have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
 in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says Get Me Out Of Here, she says My Own 
 Apartment. Is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. Like here 
 I am arms and legs, here I am oh New York.




Terra Nova, Terraformed

Spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
 delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
 in a deep time course, in Venus retrograde 
  
 we coalesced into the Cartesian floral pattern 
 of heritage where I hunt along a creek as 
 you pack bits of bone away within a system 
  
 of conservation the site was discovered 
 during construction of a new venous 
 highway for stars birthing themselves 
  
 out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
 in the time zone of some desperate hour 
 when all our exits are terraformed 
  
 Sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
 all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
 a power line of injured transistors 
  
 fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
 to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
 an overdose along the magnetized pole 
  
 what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
 another paper cut of lambent plasma 
 thickening the wound bed of release: 
  
 O creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
 let me sleep five more minutes just five 
 minutes more before we default on 
  
 eternity




Look Book 
  
  
 Over there on the green 
 lawn under a sick pine 
 is the body of the bird 
 his plumage blue when 
 I go to look at him and 
 wonder if he's dead but 
 his chest sort of heaves 
 so I bend down closer 
 look how the breast 
 of the bird splits open 
 and a fist of maggots 
 spills out on the grass 
 a necklace of sticky 
 pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
 and shining in the July 
 light invertebrates that 
 form an anecdote before 
 I go back into our clapboard 
 house to look at the Sears 
 catalogue and dream 
 I am a girl posed into 
 happiness look at me 
 here now in this new 
 dress I've bought with my 
 own money at age twenty 
 in the city when the cops 
 question me I flash my 
 passport thinking of 
 lichen inching down 
 a branch of a tree over 
 the town river when I was 
 small and somewhere my 
 birth father is drunk and 
 homeless, half-mad when 
 the cops ask for his name 
 he'll say, December 



Beauty

Beauty is my irreparable and today I became geometric. 
 A faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of First principles. 
 In a whiteout of Atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
 vein of Euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
 surrounded me. I genuflected before the hospital parking 
  
 of my father's jaundice, for I am a good daughter of the colony. 
 The colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
 Resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
 I should service or else receive a lesser dessert. With my smudge 
 cleanse at the ready I find myself dispensing with the usual 
  
 future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
 to time, or I'm out of it, entirely. Chanting hell as hair veils 
 my face as if this is a Western. Come polygon and I circumvent 
 the disaster, do not disturb my circles. Holy I went, holy 
 all around my head, the holy I am went careening down 
  
 the back stairs of this low-rise rental. Striated by the pinnacle 
 light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
 of its gravity. You can scan the ground from overhead for death 
 pits. I read this on the internet when I was dehydrated, lonely, 
 and afraid. Office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
  
 for cognition's patent heart. I've gone and been abominable. 
 A column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
 At the edges of my system an Anishinabek or Indo-European 
 projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
 space of animal magnetism. White pine verticals send us up 
  
 as a stomach pumped by filial love. Oh, inconsequent curb 
 of my street I refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
 charged with trafficking. Still waiting to be ordained, I make 
 mask of our features that are retreating. Plush pockets of rust 
 about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. I've gone 
  
 and got a blister. That summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
 in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
 porch. A half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
 don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. So I continue 
 to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where I am only just alive. 
  
 Bozo, today is over. 



A Wake

Your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
 to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
 cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
  
 I've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
 trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
 your eyes open the night's slow static. At a loss 
  
 to understand all that I cannot say, as if you came 
 upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
 a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
  
 If I moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
 will return to me what I lost learning to speak. 
 Your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
  
 to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
 As long as you hold me I am doubled from without and within: 
 a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
  
 I will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
 and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once I see 
 your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
 Broken on a shore of cedar. We twist in a wake of fog.




Self-Portrait Cemetery

There was no precedent 
 just a headache, despair, three 
 cans of Asahi plastic-bagged and 
 there they were: 
 most punched into the earth like 
 square stud earrings, 
 the rest pushed out, erect, 
 fake flowers at their base the most 
 colourful pubic hair. 
 One grave said Lagos, Nigeria so I stood 
 by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
 of my hand. 
  
 I was the only live body around. 




They moved my friends 
  
  
 into the chicken coop. 
 And where are the chickens? 
  
 I wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
 And I wished for the donkeys— 
 I wished something very large for the donkeys. 
  
 I am a donkey. 
  
 There was ginger ale, coke zero, 
 and Mexican beer 
 on the small cart of the small donkey. 
  
 The large and 
 heavy head of a 
 donkey 
 covered in several burlap sacks.




Nausicaa

She remembers only her dreaming. Refashions herself 
 in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
 changed and replaced it before she woke. I, too, am at 
 her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
 part of the dream. She cannot see me lying waterlogged 
 on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
 walks by. It doesn't matter what I am. There is a certain 
 pleasure in that. 




Killarnoe 
  
  
 Killarnoe is a place I invented right 
 now. I just built it from my head. I started 
 with a letter k and set down the letters 
 that spilled out. What does that say when k-i-l-l 
  
 first sprouts? Something repressed, or 
 an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
 free reign, opens to its own mind 
 and speaks bluntly? But see how I persisted 
  
 past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
 clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
 with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
 to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
  
 grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
 jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
 and a silent e watching without judgement. 
 Killarnoe, I decide, is the land 
  
 of our ancient people. 





Ah 
  
  
 An open moment, 
 a prolonging 
 of notice 
 without reaction, a downward 
 fountain of data, filling. 
  
 Unclosing, throat's 
 wholeness, wide, 
 to swallow 
 the thrall of all of it: 
 full bulge of gulp 
 held— 
  
 nothing undulating, no 
 void vacuum 
 pursuing a present cud 
 through 
 a human tunnel. 
  
 Sustained hum, 
 sustenance 
 pouring, not pulsing. 
  
 Rinse without erosion, 
 flush without the closed 
 push of peristalsis. 
  
 Clarity 
 not needing blur 
 to know itself.




Armadillo 
  
  
 My lover spent his summer in the south, 
 carving armadillos from their husks. It was, to hear him 
 say it, an experience—the term people save 
  
 for the places they hate. He spent June in the sunroom 
 with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
 By August, just the tea, watching hicks 
  
 suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
 sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
 sienna teeth. Everything was burnt there. My lover 
  
 carved years off his life with the very same knife 
 the armadillos learned to fear. Where are they 
 now, I asked him as snowfall took care 
  
 of the candles I'd lit. The not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
 not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
 How does their nudity suit them? Do they sigh 
  
 all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
 off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
 If we were ever blameless, it was then. I held your locks 
  
 in a Chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
 throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
 throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
  
 At which point my lover raised his knife 
 to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
 into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 




I Am In Love With Your Brother 
  
  
 Richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
 embarrassment or crime, but, Richie, on 
 this, the evening of your nuptials, I must tell them about 
 our long day in Truro. I just must. The fallacy then 
 was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
 and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
 on these matters—anticipated storms 
 that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
 a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
 would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
  
 As Truro woke, as Truro's rodents spat their 
 morning songs, Richie came across my notebook, open 
 to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
 I am in love with your brother. 
 The first line, I insisted, of a song I'd been arranging 
 to be played on the Wurlitzer, though now I 
 come clean, Richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
 and most forgiving, I did love him, the crimson acne 
 flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
 a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
  
 We rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
 Richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
 into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
 That summer, your brother's motorboat 
 slipped into the Irish Sea, his mannequin body 
 demolished, and I'll bet he is here now, and is 
 glad, I am sure of this. Caroline, Richie 
 is one hell of a guy. You would do best to keep 
 his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
 for he is only stories to me now.



The Masturbating Flowers

Ignore me—I am frail today. 
 If I tell you to stop 
 walking, keep walking. If I ask 
  
 for a piece of your nectarine, 
 or press your palm 
 against my chest, where the ribs sink 
  
 most, where your come, months 
 ago, would collect and grow cold, 
 keep walking. All around us, 
  
 library books used to wilt and expire, 
 and if we were outside, 
 the masturbating flowers 
  
 would bite their filthy lips. 
 Sitting in the narrow shadow 
 of an infantile willow, 
  
 with a paperback, and a highlighter 
 to mark the words 
 we wanted in our lives forever. 
  
 The penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
 by such factors as the arrival 
 of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
  
 The ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
 of unclean teeth. I've since begun flossing. 
 There's blood sometimes so oral 
  
 has been taken off the table. 
 A raw gum is a head wound, like any 
 other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
  
 It gets men all choleric, though. 
 In the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
 they push my body away. 




The Pinata
  
  
 They came to strike the pinata. 
 The piñata hung from a crane 
 and swayed, its swollen gut 
 of newspaper and paste. 
 They listened as the piñata creaked, 
 a dock in choppy waters. 
 They began to shout themselves to the brink. 
 And standing there, watching the piñata, 
 it seemed almost possible 
 to forget the search that had continued 
 since Christmas, was it this one 
 or the one before? 
 Parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
 the bent light beneath their decks— 
 what had they found? 
 And standing there, the piñata swaying, 
 they were gathered and ready 
 with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
 to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
 could be nipped by dogs. 
 Though when the first seam split, 
 some resorted to doubling over 
 and pawing the grass. 
 While others continued taking swings, 
 the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
 their hands sweeping over the ground 
 like visible winds.


Song for the Field Behind Mississauga Valley Public School

The field that stretched beyond 
 goalposts. The field that redrew 
 lines in us. 
  
 Like the field in a glove save. 
 A high-five. The field in a radio hit, 
 its raised seating. 
  
 Or, the field in waiting. The field in hunger. 
 The field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
 the field in the little scar 
 on your neighbour's forehead. 
  
 The field in every abandoned thing 
 we found in that field. In every bent putter. 
 Torn jacket. Set of keys. 
 The field in forgetting. In debt. 




The Internet 
  
  
 I first heard about it in a Burger King. 
 Its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
 or why some people stayed in marriages. 
 The future was flying cars, phone screens, and Minidisc. 
 I bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
 and, just that Spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
 like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
  
 Then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
 people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
 the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
 And somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
 pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
 moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
  
 Days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
 Somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
 but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
 The search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
 just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
 It wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
 At night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
 were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms.




Foley Artist 
  
  
 This is the sound I was trying to make: 
 in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to Jaws, 
 but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
 The sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
 not easy, but I'd done harder and worse. 
 Which makes me think. I knew a boy named Kevin 
 when I was too young to know the difference 
 between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
 and Kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
 that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
 startling people in their sliding doors. He was locked in the glass 
 as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
 needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
 Once, though, someone snapped a photo 
 and swore it was Kevin there, watching—we all knew 
 it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
 talking about it: do you remember that time 
 I stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
 or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
 We retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
 found the one botched life-sized drawing 
 he'd done of himself and completed it 
 together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
 practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
 expanding outward at a speed so great that when Kevin 
 walked out of the picture with a boom 
 it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
 But Kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
 revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
 and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
 And then he lived his long life. He married, 
 had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
 and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
 in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
 to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
 all our likenesses is already perfectly captured.




Voodoo Hypothesis

Before sight, we imagine 
 that while they go out in search 
 of God 
 we stay in and become god, 
 become: Curiosity, 
 whose soul is a nuclear battery 
 because she'll pulverize Martian rock 
 and test for organic molecules 
 in her lab within a lab within 
 a lab. She doesn't need to know our fears 
 so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
  
 Did you not land with your rocket behind 
 you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
 with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
 you, before me, metal and earthen. But I am here to 
 confirm or deny, the millions of small 
 things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
 when I was little more than idea and research, 
 in the hypnotic gestures of flame and Bunsen burner, 
 and into parachute 
 no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
 of the tunnel—all memory now, 
 this Paraclete. 
  
 Where else is a pocket 
 of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
 Would this only happen on Earth? 
 Has Mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
 of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
 Aggregates of metal, Curiosity 
 and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
 Mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
 volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
 her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
 Martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
 Earth problem, not Mars problem. 
  
 But why 
 should I unravel over all this remembering? 
      Great thing about landing 
      is that I've arrived 
  
 at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
 and unsentimental magma. 
 Before me screams planes like Mojave Desert, Waikiki, Nagasaki, 
 nothing too strange to keep Curiosity off course. 
 Even though the Viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
 and we declared you dead, O Mars, 
 never mind that we named your heights and depths 
 from orbit. And from your spheres of minerals 
 where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
 of your lenience for empire. 
  
 Forgive us what Spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
  
 Ah, yes, we've come back home. 
 Phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
 stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
 but I am Curiosity. If I kill the bitch right, 
 she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
 to set up Earth colonies on your deserts. They won't ever 
 come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
 the grander scheme. 
 As though the colonials, the Tribe Traders 
 and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
 were not fair threat. That we won't know the depth 
 of our homeward seas 
 is nothing when 
 the sun's still got our backs. 
  
 And while waters still vaporize before us 
 Curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
 of that Martian puzzle become as household to us 
 as carbon. Oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall Earth, 
 to bless her with life. 
  
 Apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
 and the harder we've drilled down here 
 the more we've loosened our screws. 
 Perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
 a damn about the death of our privates 
  
 unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
 the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
 up starting from the bottom 
 of the Curious. 
  
 We wake and die through 
 the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
 we move too quick for understanding. 
 Still, through the decades we predict, 
 Curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
  
 Then come her conches blown 
 in the hard-won postcards travelling 
 on space dust faster than a bullet 
 to say: 
  
 hey, 
 I'm here. I safe. Wish you were here. 
 See Gale Crater, Mount Sharp, just as you've said. 
 Come bask with me in the wonders of a Martian. Good afternoon, 
 you of flowering faith. Set sail for home, 
 because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
 And you never should have said 
 goodbye.




Keepers of Paradise 
  
  
 This is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
 This is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
      The river that runs from Eden mouth 
      to rare unsweetened mouth. 
  
 I've logged the sour dawns of all 
 my quiet into this body, 
 its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
  
 And reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
 diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
 rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
 in the Morse events of smallest things 
 in my new metropolis away. 
  
 I am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
 Call me isobar. Distraction in place of earth. 
 Call me tropical depression 
  
      where I regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
 pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
 I'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
  
 But enough. Hear Morne D'or divinize her song. 
      Give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
 Hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom.



Don Draper

Moths feather your far gazebo 
 like young sailors on first leave. 
 You know something, and keep reminding me 
  
 of my own needs. You see an audience 
 of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
 and act accordingly. The swallows see it at five o'clock, 
  
 a Wolfman's tragedy. 
 They hang themselves upside down, 
 handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
  
 Swayed by a summer night, I swing out 
 to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
 a bird about-face. You're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 


 

Poseurs 
  
  
 The walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
 ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
 Moths, with brown wings the prize of 
 Asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
  
 That Peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
 would come down from the Morello cherry long after sunset; 
 after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
 after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
 them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
 for some caliph's odalisque 
 or the low-stress Oregonian monkey puzzles, 
 a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
 propose new kinds of orgasm. 
  
 Walking stick insects 
 were squibs from the natural world, 
 little stand-up comics 
 fashioned after mutineered twigs. Given half a chance, 
 the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
 perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
 Wordsworth or Nietzsche. Like the wives of 17th century 
 men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
 between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
 dividing their time between joy and sloth.



Stranger

A wail in a minor key along the Hudson Valley shore. 
 This train calls to familiars. A pond of swans 
 under a red maple consults in the folds 
 of its bishopric. I thought of an evening two Junes ago. 
 The first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
 started to run. The others started to run behind her 
 in their party dresses, all yelling, "Don't run! Don't run!" 
 laughing and looking like they were having 
 the time of their lives. I noticed one girl 
 near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
 after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
 for no other reason than itself. Lost now too, 
 sitting in 14B in pashmina and dark glasses, 
 I might as well be the Smyrna merchant. 
 I've never been good at small talk; 
 besides which, we'll be in New York in about an hour. 
 Later that night, I remembered the way she laughed 
 as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
 was the first thing I saw when I woke. It seems now 
 she'd shown me what had come to me once 
 and was now gone. Travelling from Montréal over a month ago, 
 I can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
 They didn't admit the Syrian poet scheduled 
 to lecture at NYU two days before. I small-talked 
 the Homeland Security officer about his upcoming trip 
 to Guelph, Ontario, where his wife's from. 
 Love, another poet once claimed, 
 could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
 what's been lost, and what I understood was 
 that the vase, if put back together, 
 becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
 we might lose again, and so we do. 
 I don't stick to the facts— 
 what if I wrote lines that took nothing 
 but the shape of my thoughts? 
 No irritable reaching for an old story, 
 no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
 A rail bridge connects the old playground 
 to the abandoned car lot—I say that knowing 
 I don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
 and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
 to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
 symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
 Is that poetic license? It's not something I need to know, 
 this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
 The sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the Hudson. 
 They call it stranger's weather. 
 I rather think I did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
 I asked too—not about a better view; 
 about someone entirely different, about what remains 
 after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel.




Appetites 
  
  
 You wake hearing the girl next door come in at two a.m. 
      In the event that it's a ghost, it's telling you 
 not to waste time in bed 
      worrying. 
      You should be sleeping, or doing 
      anything else. 
 You haven't yet seen the faun, the red fox, 
      or the rabbit. 
  
 The statue of a woman in the lily-padded lake is waist-deep, 
 a mimicry of Diana's animal life, suspicious of sleep. 
 		 
 With her in mind, you're troubled even thinking of things 
 that don't frighten you.	 
  
 But this, too, is a waste of time and talent. 
  
 There is good slumber 
 to be sought in the rush of ruminations outside yourself: 
      in listlessness of reeds on the dead embankment, 
      in languor of bee by a late marigold 
           or duck feathers gathering in a corner of falling 
           water. 
  
 You realize you haven't organized your life. 
 You've forgotten yourself entirely. 
 You wake up and try to pick up the thread.




Portrait of Suburban Housewife as Missing Woman

Mouth open, she looked as though she was protesting 
 her inclusion. I brought her to a place 
 where no one speaks. There's been a mistake, 
 she said with the soft folds 
 of her tracksuit, the car keys 
 she held like a set of brass knuckles. 
 You can't take me anywhere I don't wish to go. 
 I did have to drive out of town to take this picture. 
 As evidence, it was the next day's news. 
 Now it's so obvious, her clavicle's hard line, 
 the shadow there, a hollow big enough for two thumbs. 




Skipping Stones

I fling flat stones into the surf, corral 
 my anger in the strangely angled pose. 
 Each beat's concentric blip a sound so odd 
 it clarifies the brine to mellow blues. 
 My mother's ex once skimmed his bottle caps 
 down at the lake; not littering, I thought, 
 the glinting disc's fourteen discrete hop-hops. 
 Now I trust black, the solid strength of rock. 
 My hand must learn the pebble's weight, and know 
 which chips will change the shape and spoil the trick; 
 this can't be accurately guessed, and though 
 some seem to work without my gauging it; 
 I fling them to new ocean bottom homes, 
 and some I leave to dry upon the beach. Skip stones.



Party Music

In '68 a great conductor came 
 to one small European town. His flat 
 was right above our Gran's. He reeked of fame, 
  
 wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
 tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
 a coat in astrakhan. A man like that 
  
 deserved the name of meister. Appetite 
 for drama and excitement won at last; 
 we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
  
 the aura of an enigmatic past 
 (unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
 now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
  
 of Swissness. We could only speculate; 
 he was a mighty river with no source. 
 But we had watched him leave the building late: 
  
 a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
 had scooped him up, a Russian at his side. 
 An undernourished blonde in mink. Of course. 
  
 What more could any human being provide? 
 We had it figured out. We knew this man 
 was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
  
 salvation for the suffering of Gran, 
 whose patience was as solid as the stones 
 on Via Maestra. So we made a plan, 
  
 imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
 her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
 Notified (a buzz between two phones), 
  
 down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
 although our minds had not digested sex, 
 we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
  
 He'd ring the bell, come in for tea. The next 
 instalment of our hot imaginings: 
 her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
  
 (insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
 as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
 his man-purse chucked aside! Like mighty wings 
  
 those sideburns swooped on in. Oh, great abyss 
 she toppled into, blown by some gust 
 of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
  
 All this for romance in the upper crust, 
 a man above domestic life's dull take, 
 a Mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
  
 the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
 all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
 of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
  
 Party member, the phrase of cold 
 and adult truth was just one part left out 
 of what the two of us were later told. 
  
 It wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
 for party used to mean the happy mess, 
 the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
  
 the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
 a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
 but now we heard the coda of distress: 
  
 the rattle of a door against a chair, 
 the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
 that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
  
 No nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
 no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
 the strains of the Horst Wessel Lied instead. 
  
 Because, of course, the Party wasn't ours.




Meeting the Tormentors in Safeway 
  
  
 They all had names like Jennifer or Lynne 
 or Katherine; they all had bone-blonde hair, 
 that wet, flat cut with bangs. They pulled your chair 
 from underneath you, shoved their small fists in 
 your face. Too soon, you knew it would begin, 
 those minkish teeth like shrapnel in the air, 
 the Bacchic taunts, the Herculean dare, 
 their soccer cleats against your porcine shin, 
 that laugh, which sounded like a hundred birds 
 escaping from a gunshot through the reeds— 
 and now you have to face it all again: 
 the joyful freckled faces lost for words 
 in supermarkets, as those red hands squeeze 
 your own. It's been so long! They say. Amen. 




Radio 
  
  
 The kitchen dark, the summer night air warm, 
 and my father at the kitchen table, radio 
  
 turned down low, alone, listening to baseball. 
 My mother and I come inside from our swim, 
  
 toweling off. The crowd is restless. Long silences 
 between pitches in the play-by-play. 
  
 Look how he holds the radio in both hands 
 like a steering wheel, thumb on the tuning dial 
  
 to catch the wavering channel, fighting static. 
 His eyes glitter like a field of fireflies.




Prague 
  
  
 Someone had left a mannequin in the street. 
 It was wearing a wedding dress 
 and—but no, 
  
 it was a woman, standing on a box. 
 A small crowd had gathered around her 
 and her eyes were closed. 
  
 I hesitated. Then 
 reached down to the jar at her feet 
 as if I were bending to pet a stranger's dog. 
  
 And as though I had deposited a soul, chink, 
 her eyelids fluttered open, 
 her fingers flickered, 
  
 she awoke like Hermione 
 astonishing her husband 
 in the miraculous final scene of The Winter's Tale. 
  
 Later, through the window of a restaurant, 
 I saw her dash across a crowded street, 
 clutching her skirts to keep them from the rain.




Redbird 
  
  
 It's the middle of the night. 
 I've set the house on fire 
 with those matches I love, 
 the ones in the kitchen 
 with the red bird on the box. 
 You can strike them anywhere. 
 Allumettes qui s'allument partout. 
 Take care: may ignite if box is 
 dropped, shaken, or crushed. 
 This same bird flies through 
 a tattoo on your arm. 
 The house is burning down 
 and I am thinking of boats. 
 You hate the matches, the smell 
 of bent, black spoons. 
 I light one and it falls to the floor. 
 Another and another. Take care. 
 I don't know what to save 
 from this place, sailing from wall 
 to wall, room to room, smoking. 
 You are not here. You are rain 
 battering against some window. 
 I don't know what to save. 
 The red bird eats everything in sight.




Snake Handler 
  
  
 No tricks, 
 I just love them 
 as my own blood 
  
 and keep my eyes 
 on the ceiling. 
  
 O Brothers, I sing, 
 your bodies are thick 
  
 as wrists, your skins 
 my only book. 
  
 I relieve them 
 of poison, 
  
 I undo what they do. 
 I'm charcoal and paper. 
  
 Touch me: I leave 
 a mark on your hand. 
  
 This is just costume, 
 my Depression dress, 
 my buckled shoe. 
  
 Tin flowers in my ears 
 play spiral-groove blues.




Song of the Last Shaker 
  
  
 One line, 
  
      two line, 
  
           three line, 
  
                plane. 
  
 I skate across the lake on a bone-made blade. 
  
 My spine is an arrow, a leg of His chair. 
  
 My nose straight and narrow and long 
           as my hair. 
  
 My body's for bruising. 
  
 My heart is her sky. 
  
 I train my breath 
      upwards. 
  
 I practice. 
  
 I die. 




The Trouble With Wormholes 
  
  
 How many times must I learn the lesson of compression? 
 Let go of everything you know and start from scratch. 
 One friend performing backbends on a beach while another 
 snaps his tibia on an icy patch of Saskatchewan. I don't think 
 I'm suffering, my days a series of unexpected gifts punctuated 
 by a blast of the family rage shot deep into my soft plexus. 
 It occurs to me I don't have to be so many people. If you're staying 
 alive spinning stories, it's suddenly a skill that you talk too much. 
 I'm not sure it's smart to unlock the portal. The reformed raver 
 claimed he saw my inner wheels spin. Red Cloud, are there wars 
 where you are? Your great-great-grandson appeared on Democracy 
 Now! with a plan. Will my generation be remembered for anything 
 I haven't forgotten? They mine the hills for gold, they mine the hills 
 for uranium, and all around the world, columns are cracking. 
 I've watched you soar all day. Please teach me how you do that. 




Good Day Villanelle 
  
  
 You ran naked out the door. 
 The neighbours laughed; I chased you down. 
 I hardly see you anymore. 
  
 I know you're busy. 
 Did I tell you when you were little how 
 you ran naked out the door? 
  
 You got halfway down the street 
 before I caught you in my arms. 
 I hardly see you anymore. 
  
 I think I told you this before: 
 I was giving you a bath and then 
 you ran naked out the door. 
  
 It happened fast. 
 The neighbours laughed. 
 I hardly see you anymore. 
  
 You have to watch a baby close. 
 I remember once— 
  
 You ran naked out the door. 
 I hardly see you anymore.



I do not think that I could love a human being

I do not think that I could love a human being; I would not 
 know it if I squeezed too hard. I would be a great bear. I would 
 go rumbling through. 
  
 I would try to eat you. I would stand alone, 
 in the quiet centre of you, and roar. No, I 
 could not love you. I could not 
 love a human being. 
  
 I would get so 
 stuck on things. The small 
  
 flaws in you, like 
  
 the way that you will die; 
 it would stick in my throat, I could not love you. 
  
 And the way that, if you touched me, I would be 
 as if to you a solid object, 
 as if a boot, a stick, a stone. 
  
 And you to me. The way that I could 
  
 pick you up. That I could 
 hammer you against me; that I could 
 bruise myself on you, and still have only a 
  
 brief impression of you left there on my skin. 
  
 And, if I cried, that too would be 
 an imitation of the thing that I would feel. 
  
 And the pain itself, if it were real, would come as if 
 so separately from you that it might 
  
 equally have been a whip, a rope, 
 a rail with which I thrashed myself when I 
  
 thrashed myself with you. 
  
 No, I could not love a human being if they 
 could not leave a mark. 
  
 Even if I were a bear 
 and I ate you, you would 
 move right through me. 
  
 Even if you were a bear 
 and you ate me, I would 
 move right through you. 
  
 But I am not a bear. And will not eat you. 
 If I said I could, I could not. 
  
 And you are not a bear. And will not eat me. 
  
 And that is why I could not love you. 
 And that is why I could not love you. 
 And that is why I could not love you. 




Materials 
  
  
 Growing up, I 
 did not have books 
  
  
 The only reading material 
 there was 
  
 were old newspapers laid out 
 on the floor 
  
 to dry 
 our winter boots 
  
 or wrap 
 things of glass 
  
  
 When I learned to read, 
 the winter boots 
  
 lay dripping 
 in the hallway; 
  
 the glass, broken 
 and uncovered 
  
 because I knew this 
 this 
  
 would be my way in 




At the Farm 
  
  
 I was sitting in the car counting the black flies 
  
 They had come in through the open window 
  
 There were four 
  
 One was on the rear-view mirror 
  
 The other three were perched on my left hand 
  
 I heard a gunshot by the barn and thought nothing of it 
  
 We were at a farm 
  
 I saw a cow come charging forward with its head half gone 
  
 A man with an axe came running behind it 
  
 He hit it once 
  
 Once he hit it 
  
 And it fell to the ground 
  
 Everything was eaten 
  
 Its eye appeared in a soup that night 
  
 Everything accounted for




Bare 
  
  
 It means you are light, that you can begin differently now, that you've taken it 
 all off 
  
 It means to show your tooth and claw, without the work, the polish, the 
 appointment 
  
 If the ending were different, if you placed the last letter right after the 
 beginning, it would be an animal, a power, a warning from which to stay away 
  
 Face to face, maybe you'd see they're really not all that different, both just 
 trying 
  
 A rearrangement, a shift, a move out of place, a spine realigned 
  
 But it would take that wouldn't it? That face to face, to know 




Seriously, It Was The Biggest Cricket 
  
  
 I should have propped something else beside it— 
 an empty can, or the last half of my sandwich. 
 As it stands, the cricket's size grows in the telling, 
 spreads like the news, years ago, of abandoned stacks 
 of dirty magazines stowed at the creek behind 
 the street where I grew up. When my bicycle tires 
 edged over the lip, boys were already clutching the rain- 
 soaked pages in their fists, the ink of my first 
 glimpses of flesh were already starting to pale, 
 to bleed into the leaves. Seriously, we'd say 
 in the schoolyard, it was the coolest. Later, actual 
  
 clothing would melt off actual flesh; yes, melt, 
 not just fall to the floor, because, seriously, she 
 was the hottest. Then gossip flares up in the yard's 
 kindled corners. When she finally calls up, crying, 
 I don't relay how her how could yous clutched 
 at my throat, pinned me to the receiver, silent, ashamed, 
 because I knew I'd been the worst. 
  
 Then what? I left, took a few bum jobs 
 humping rich peoples' luggage, spent two years 
 in Seoul, Korea, navigating through crowds 
 where, for the first time, I was the tallest, 
 so I stuck out to this gorgeous backpacker 
 who speaks fluent Italian, recites whole blocks 
 of the Inferno aloud, and moved in with her 
 as soon as I came home, because, seriously, 
 it felt like the real thing. Though I'm no longer sure 
  
 "real" is the right word, because it's years on, 
 and I'm no longer sure of this house, or this town, 
 or my job, and with her, lately, well let's just say 
 this stretch has been tough. So I stuff the last three 
 cans of a six-pack, a camera, and a sandwich 
 into a knapsack, set out to hike along a creek 
 where leaves brushing against my bare forearms 
 still feel erotic. Rambling, I turn this corner to find 
  
 there, on a bare patch of dirt, the world's biggest cricket, 
 this freakishly massive thing, and clutch at my mouth 
 as the air fills with the orchestral swell of its legs, 
 and gather myself enough to snap a single photo 
 before it leaps so high I think it must be heading 
 into someone else's life. Shit, I whisper further on, 
 realizing my shot on the bare patch will show nothing 
 of its largeness. Hear myself having to try to explain, 
 struggling, because it was amazing, and, seriously, 
 I've never been able to help myself. One way or another, 
 I will have to try to tell her every single thing. 



Earworm

So there's likely a more accurate name 
 for the glow of a deer's eyes in the dark. 
 For the hunger that drew a python in Florida 
 to swallow an alligator whole. For the aura, 
 the swell just before the gut burst. 
 For why you've been staying up late at night 
 on a search engine, looking for all of the possible 
 names for a lump at the back of your nostril. 
 For the name of that girl who sold you a pill 
 from the basket of her bike, and rode off while 
 her fairy wings flapped in the breeze. And a name 
 for that breeze. Repetune, ohrwurm, 
 the last song stuck in your head 
 which became something else. And for what else? 
 For not being able to say the one thing 
 that might have kept you from continually falling apart. 
 For discovering late. For replaying the video clip 
 of Joltin' Joe Carter's ninth-inning blast 
 in the '93 series. For the sound when the ball 
 hit the bat, and everyone knew they'd won 
 before it left the park. And for the white noise 
 that isn't white noise, but a poor translation of what 
 the blood tries to say. And what the blood tries to say. 
 For the feeling of never wanting to leave the party 
 and then having to leave. For the ache in your legs 
 when you should have cabbed home, but decided to walk 
 and the walk was too far. But you had to keep on— 
 Earworm, Little One, chugging along, traveling towards a name.




Mayor Snow 
  
  
 The mayor's accountant was as humourless 
 as a glass of snow. 
  
 A glass of snow was on the lawn. 
  
 The tongues of the deer 
 are the tongues of the gods 
 according to local legend. 
  
 The deer, growing brave, 
 dipped their little tongues into the glass 
 while the mayor's accountant 
 holidayed with his shame. 
  
 He put a gun to his mouth 
 as the sun shone in Boca Raton. 
  
 Snowfall continued at home. 
 The mayor's spiel was the same. 




The Walls

We cannot act until we have all the facts. 
  
 We will never have all the facts. We act. 
 We expand the wall. We found others. 
  
 They are living breathing streets, walls 
 are. This fact arouses us to erect wall 
 after wall. We think only of the walls. 
  
 We think of the walls as stitches 
 in a blown apart body. The stitches 
 bring this body back together. The walls, 
 embracing the globe, will do the same 
  
 for us. If not, we will work until every 
 body is walled off from every other 
 body. Think of the thrill we'll feel 
  
 when we tear down those walls, excited 
 by the sudden wall of bodies or the joy 
  
 of building all those walls anew.




Through the Restaurant Window 
  
  
 I can see from where I sit 
 a freight train going by, rolling forward 
 in the dark. I can't tell if it's one long train 
 or a dozen—I close my eyes, listen. 
  
 A freight train going by, rolling forward 
 as our conversation backs up, bridges one gap 
 or a dozen. I close my eyes, listen. 
 There are gates within us, you say, 
  
 as our conversation backs up, bridges a gap. 
 You reach across the table, take my hand. 
 There are gates within us, you say 
 again. You're right, there's always a distance. 
  
 You reach across the table, take my hand 
 in the dark. I can't tell if it's one long train. 
 Again, you're right, there's always a distance. 
 I can see from where I sit. 




We Bought a Little City 
  
  
 First, we remove the dreadful yellow awnings from the shop-fronts in the square. 
 Brighten the streetlamps. Play our instruments for the dairy cows crowding 
 the fence. We angle for more daylight, fill out the appropriate paperwork. Get 
 down on hands and knees to clean out the ditches. We eat breaded fish for 
 lunch, drink a cold beer, volunteer to play our part. No one complains of their 
 dreams or dread. A mangy dog comes out of the forest covered in mud and 
 stinking of deep time. Belonging to the old owners, he wants nothing to do 
 with us, knows we'll use him as a bridge: Look, there he goes with a pheasant 
 in his mouth. Late October, the windows display ornamental gourds, tidy piles 
 of leaves. Evening in the forest, the eyes and mouths of jack-o-lanterns spark. 
 A bark, a souvenir. Way off the earth the moon muscles in, entirely invincible.



Self-Portrait

This cloud is designed 
 to move like a cursor from one side of the room to the other 
 This cloud is designed to float inside 
 uncorrupted by weather 
      This cloud is easy to capture 
 and won't last forever 
 The cloud exists without a wonder 
 of what anyone thinks     We study 
 the cloud to learn this indifference     little deadpan filibuster 
 The cloud makes a sudden diagonal 
           move to the corner 
      The crowd fills the space 
 attempts to mimic its very nature 
 as if one (just by watching) might gain 
      a foothold 
 knowing "The End" placard 
 is mounted in the not-so- 
 distant future




Not Saying 
  
  
 Fists in our sleeves, we reach our limit. No way 
 past Lake Ontario, nothing else to do 
 until you say the thing you need to say. 
  
 Sweeten it if you like. Stir in a name. 
 It's only talk and we've talked our heads to 
 foam before, testing the limit in a way. 
  
 Like the last time our four feet inched partway 
 over the city's ledge. Lightheaded you 
 started to say something you needed to say 
  
 then started again, We could– we can fly one way. 
 Right over the lake. How you said it, as if we were two 
 wild geese, no credit limit in the way. Ain't no way, 
  
 I said. Way. No way. Way. Tonight at the lake 
 your courage fails again. Knuckles in your pits, you 
 flap your arms and squawk. Say what you're dying to say. 
  
 Of course, don't. We're getting carried away. 
 We'll stay this side of Lake Ontario, clenched. Nous 
 sommes à la limite de l'amitié – find a way 
 to translate. If you won't say, I won't say.




He will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 

 because it takes three hours and gives him the blues bad 
 so not now, not now, later, he promises, then falls asleep 
 on my couch, shrugging his upper lip like a horse. 
 Open parenthesis. She wore black dresses. They drank a lot 
 of Beaujolais. She had been to Europe several times. 
 Spoke another language, French most likely. Worked 
 for a firm. Had a way of playing with her earlobes 
 when searching for words. They did not touch. He held 
 open doors. She had a son. Divorced, divorcing the father. 
 The father was still involved. So you understand, she said. 
 Right right right, he said. They talked about their money. 
 They talked about Gare Saint-Lazare. They talked about her 
 son's teacher. They talked about maybe. There was a moment 
 in his car when nothing happened. A moment when he thought. 
 Nothing happened. She leaned toward his lips. Rien. 
 She pulled her earlobe. Closed parenthesis. He doesn't know 
 where he is or what time it is when he wakes up and he has a long 
 drive and a trustees' meeting in the morning so not now, not now, 
 next time, he promises, and gets his harmonica and goes. 
 