TABLE OF CONTENTS:

To an Intra-Mural Rat
Reticence and Volubility
To a Chameleon
A Talisman
Injudicious Gardening
A Fool, a Foul Thing, a Distressful Lunatic
To Military Progress
An Egyptian Pulled Glass Bottle in the Shape of a Fish
To a Steam Roller
Diligence is to Magic as Progress is to Flight
To a Snail
The Bricks are Fallen Down, We Will Build with Hewn Stones. The Sycamores are Cut Down, We Will Change to Cedars.
Nothing will Cure the Sick Lion but to Eat an Ape
To Statecraft Embalmed
The Monkey Puzzler
Poetry
Critics and Connoisseurs
To be Liked by You Would be a Calamity
Like a Bulrush
Sojourn in the Whale
My Apish Cousins
Roses Only
The Fish
Black Earth
Radical
In the Days of Prismatic Color
Peter
Picking and Choosing
When I Buy Pictures
A Grave
Those Various Scalpels
New York
People’s Surroundings
Snakes, Mongooses, Snake-Charmers, and the Like
Bowls
Novices
Marriage
Silence
An Octopus
Sea Unicorns and Land Unicorns
The Steeple-Jack
The Student
No Swan So Fine
Too Much
In Costa Rica
The Malay Dragon
The Tuatera
The Frigate Pelican
The Buffalo
Nine Nectarines and Other Porcelain
Pigeons
See in the Midst of Fair Leaves
Walking-Sticks and Paperweights and Watermarks
Virginia Britannia
Bird-Witted
Half Deity
Smooth Gnarled Crape Myrtle
The Pangolin
Rigorists
Four Quartz Crystal Clocks
The Paper Nautilus
Nevertheless
The Wood-Weasel
Elephants
The Mind is an Enchanting Thing
Keeping Their World Large
His Shield
Propriety
Voracities and Verities Sometimes are Interacting
A Face
By Disposition of Angels
The Icosasphere
Armor’s Undermining Modesty
Quoting An Also Private Thought
We Call Them the Brave
Bulwarked against Fate
Apparition of Splendor
The Sycamore
O to Be a Dragon
I May, I Might, I Must
A Jellyfish
Values in Use
No better than "a withered daffodil"
The Arctic Ox (or Goat)
Saint Nicholas,
For February 14th
Combat Cultural
Blue Bug
Arthur Mitchell
The mind, intractable thing
Old Amusement Park
Charity Overcoming Envy
Saint Valentine,
I’ve been Thinking ...
Love in America?
Tippoo’s Tiger
“Like a Wave at the Curl”
Appellate Jurisdiction
To William Butler Yeats on Tagore
To a Friend in the Making
He Made This Screen
Holes Bored in a Workbag by the Scissors
Apropos of Mice
The Just Man And
In "Designing a Cloak to Cloak his Designs," you Wrested from Oblivion, a Coat of Immortality for your own Use.
The Past is the Present
Old Tiger




POEMS:


To an Intra-Mural Rat

You make me think of many men
Once met to be forgot again
   Or merely resurrected
In a parenthesis of wit
That found them hastening through it
Too brisk to be inspected.




Reticence and Volubility

"When I am dead,"
The wizard said,
   "I’ll look upon the narrow way
   And this Dante,
      And know that he was right
      And he’ll delight
         In my remorse,
         Of course."
"When I am dead,"
The student said,
   "I shall have grown so tolerant,
   I’ll find I can’t
      Laugh at your sorry plight
      Or take delight
         In your chagrin,
         Merlin."




To a Chameleon

Hid by the august foliage and fruit of the grape vine,
  Twine,
   Your anatomy
      Round the pruned and polished stem,
         Chameleon.
         Fire laid upon
      An emerald as long as
   The Dark King’s massy
One,
Could not snap the spectrum up for food as you have done.




A Talisman

Under a splintered mast,
Torn from the ship and cast
   Near her hull,

A stumbling shepherd found
Embedded in the ground,
   A seagull

Of lapis lazuli,
A scarab of the sea,
   With wings spread—

Curling its coral feet,
Parting its beak to greet
   Men long dead.




Injudicious Gardening

If yellow betokens infidelity,
   I am an infidel.
      I could not bear a yellow rose ill will
      Because books said that yellow boded ill,
   White promised well;

However, your particular possession—
   The sense of privacy
      In what you did—deflects from your estate
      Offending eyes, and will not tolerate
   Effrontery.




A Fool, a Foul Thing, a Distressful Lunatic

With webs of cool
   Chain mail and his stout heart, is not the gander
   Mocked, and ignorantly designated yet,
To play the fool?
   "Egyptian vultures clean as cherubim,
   All ivory and jet," are they most foul?
And nature’s child,
   That most precocious water bird, the loon — why
   Is he foremost in the madman’s alphabet;
Why is he styled
   In folly’s catalogue, distressful lunatic?




To Military Progress

You use your mind
Like a millstone to grind
   Chaff.
You polish it
And with your warped wit
   Laugh

At your torso,
Prostrate where the crow
   Falls
On such faint hearts
As its god imparts,
   Calls

And claps its wings
Till the tumult brings
   More
Black minute-men
To revive again,
   War

At little cost.
They cry for the lost
   Head
And seek their prize
Till the evening sky’s
   Red




An Egyptian Pulled Glass Bottle in the Shape of a Fish

Here we have thirst
And patience from the first,
   And art, as in a wave held up for us to see
   In its essential perpendicularity;

Not brittle but
Intense—the spectrum, that
   Spectacular and nimble animal the fish,
   Whose scales turn aside the sun’s sword with their polish.




To a Steam Roller

The illustration
is nothing to you without the application.
   You lack half wit. You crush all the particles down
   into close conformity, and then walk back and forth on them.

Sparkling chips of rock
are crushed down to the level of the parent block.
   Were not "impersonal judgment in aesthetic matters, a metaphysical impossibility," you

might fairly achieve
it. As for butterflies, I can hardly conceive
   of one’s attending upon you, but to question
   the congruence of the complement is vain, if it exists.




Diligence is to Magic as Progress is to Flight

With an elephant to ride upon — "with rings on her fingers and bells on her toes,"
   she shall outdistance calamity anywhere she goes.
Speed is not in her mind inseparable from carpets. Locomotion arose
   in the shape of an elephant; she clambered up and chose
to travel laboriously. So far as magic carpets are concerned, she knows
   that although the semblance of speed may attach to scarecrows
of aesthetic procedure, the substance of it is embodied in such of those
   tough-grained animals as have outstripped man’s whim to suppose
them ephemera, and have earned that fruit of their ability to endure blows,
   which dubs them prosaic necessities—not curios.




To a Snail

If "compression is the first grace of style,"
you have it. Contractility is a virtue
as modesty is a virtue.
It is not the acquisition of any one thing
that is able to adorn,
or the incidental quality that occurs
as a concomitant of something well said,
that we value in style,
but the principle that is hid:
in the absence of feet, "a method of conclusions";
"a knowledge of principles,"
in the curious phenomenon of your occipital horn.




The Bricks are Fallen Down, We Will Build with Hewn Stones. The Sycamores are Cut Down, We Will Change to Cedars.

In what sense shall we be able to
   secure to ourselves peace and do as they did—
   who, when they were not able to rid
      themselves of war, cast out fear?
         They did not say: "We shall not be brought
         into subjection by the naughtiness of the sea;
though we have ‘defeated ourselves with
   false balances’ and laid weapons in the scale,
   glory shall spring from in-glory; hail,
      flood, earthquake, and famine shall
         not intimidate us nor shake the
         foundations of our inalienable energy."




Nothing will Cure the Sick Lion but to Eat an Ape

Perceiving that in the masked ball
attitude, there is a hollowness
that beauty’s light momentum can’t redeem,
   since disproportionate satisfaction anywhere
   lacks a proportionate air,

he let us know without offense
by his hands’ denunciatory
upheaval, that he despised the fashion
   of curing us with an ape—making it his care
   to smother us with fresh air.




To Statecraft Embalmed

There is nothing to be said for you. Guard
Your secret. Conceal it under your hard
   Plumage, necromancer.
      O
Bird, whose tents were "awnings of Egyptian
Yarn," shall Justice’ faint, zigzag inscription—
   Leaning like a dancer—
      Show
The pulse of its once vivid sovereignty?
You say not, and transmigrating from the
   Sarcophagus, you wind
      Snow
Silence round us and with moribund talk,
Half limping and half ladified, you stalk
   About. Ibis, we find
      No
Virtue in you—alive and yet so dumb.
Discreet behavior is not now the sum
   Of statesmanlike good sense.
      Though
It were the incarnation of dead grace?
As if a death mask ever could replace
   Life’s faulty excellence!
      Slow
To remark the steep, too strict proportion
Of your throne, you’ll see the wrenched distortion
   Of suicidal dreams
      Go
Staggering toward itself and with its bill,
Attack its own identity, until
   Foe seems friend and friend seems
      Foe.




The Monkey Puzzler

A kind of monkey or pine-lemur
not of interest to the monkey,
but to the animal higher up which resembles it,
in a kind of Flaubert’s Carthage, it defies one—
this "Paduan cat with lizard," this "tiger in a bamboo thicket."
"An interwoven somewhat," it will not come out.
Ignore the Foo dog and it is forthwith more than a dog,
its tail superimposed upon itself in a complacent half spiral,
incidentally so witty;
but this pine-tree—this pine-tiger, is a tiger, not a dog.
It knows that if a nomad may have dignity,
Gibraltar has had more—
that "it is better to be lonely than unhappy."
A conifer contrived in imitation of the glyptic work of jade and hard stone cutters,
a true curio in this bypath of curio collecting,
it is worth its weight in gold but no one takes it
from these woods in which society’s not knowing is colossal,
the lion’s ferocious chrysanthemum head seeming kind in comparison.
This porcupine-quilled, infinitely complicated starkness—
this is beauty—"a certain proportion in the skeleton which gives the best results."
One is at a loss, however, to know why it should be here,
in this morose part of the earth—
to account for its origin at all;
but we prove, we do not explain our birth.




Poetry

I too, dislike it: there are things that are important beyond all this fiddle.
      Reading it, however, with a perfect contempt for it, one discovers that there is in
   it after all, a place for the genuine.
      Hands that can grasp, eyes
      that can dilate, hair that can rise
         if it must, these things are important not because a

high sounding interpretation can be put upon them but because they are
      useful; when they become so derivative as to become unintelligible,
   the same thing may be said for all of us, that we
      do not admire what
      we cannot understand: the bat,
         holding on upside down or in quest of something to

eat, elephants pushing, a wild horse taking a roll, a tireless wolf under
      a tree, the immovable critic twitching his skin like a horse that feels a flea, the base-
   ball fan, the statistician—
      nor is it valid
         to discriminate against "business documents and

school-books"; all these phenomena are important. One must make a distinction
      however: when dragged into prominence by half poets, the result is not poetry,
   nor till the poets among us can be
      "literalists of
      the imagination"—above
         insolence and triviality and can present

for inspection, imaginary gardens with real toads in them, shall we have
      it. In the meantime, if you demand on one hand,
   the raw material of poetry in
      all its rawness and
      that which is on the other hand
         genuine, then you are interested in poetry.




Critics and Connoisseurs

There is a great amount of poetry in unconscious
   fastidiousness. Certain Ming
      products, imperial floor coverings of coach wheel yellow, are well enough in their way but I have seen something
      that I like better—a
            mere childish attempt to make an imperfectly ballasted animal stand up,
            similar determination to make a pup
               eat his meat on the plate.

I remember a swan under the willows in Oxford
   with flamingo colored, maple-
      leaflike feet. It reconnoitered like a battle ship. Disbelief and conscious fastidiousness were the staple
      ingredients in its
         disinclination to move. Finally its hardihood was not proof against its
         proclivity to more fully appraise such bits
            of food as the stream

bore counter to it; it made away with what I gave it
   to eat. I have seen this swan and
      I have seen you; I have seen ambition without understanding in a variety of forms. Happening to stand
      by an ant hill, I have
         seen a fastidious ant carrying a stick, north, south, east, west, till it turned on
         itself, struck out from the flower bed into the lawn,
            and returned to the point

from which it had started. Then abandoning the stick as
   useless and overtaxing its
      jaws with a particle of whitewash pill-like but heavy, it again went through the same course of procedure. What is
      there in being able
         to say that one has dominated the stream in an attitude of self defense,
         in proving that one has had the experience
            of carrying a stick?




To be Liked by You Would be a Calamity

"Attack is more piquant than concord," but when
   You tell me frankly that you would like to feel
      My flesh beneath your feet,
         I’m all abroad; I can but put my weapon up, and
            Bow you out.
Gesticulation—it is half the language.
   Let unsheathed gesticulation be the steel
      Your courtesy must meet,
         Since in your hearing words are mute, which to my senses
      Are a shout.




Like a Bulrush

or the spike
of a channel marker or the
moon, he superintended the demolition of his image in
the water by the wind; he did not strike

them at the
time as being different from
any other inhabitant of the water; it was as if he
were a seal in the combined livery

of bird plus
snake; it was as if he knew that
the penguins were not fish and as if in their bat blindness, they did not
realize that he was amphibious.




Sojourn in the Whale

Trying to open locked doors with a sword, threading
   the points of needles, planting shade trees upside down; swallowed by the opaqueness of one whom the seas
love better than they love you, Ireland—

you have lived and lived on every kind of shortage.
   You have been compelled by hags to spin gold thread from straw and have heard men 
   say: "There is a feminine
temperament in direct contrast to

ours which makes her do these things. Circumscribed by a
   heritage of blindness and native incompetence, she will become wise and will be forced to give
in. Compelled by experience, she

will turn back; water seeks its own level": and you
   have smiled. "Water in motion is far
      from level." You have seen it when obstacles happened to bar
the path—rise automatically.




My Apish Cousins

winked too much and were afraid of snakes. The zebras, supreme in
their abnormality; the elephants with their fog-colored skin
   and strictly practical appendages
      were there, the small cats; and the parakeet—
         trivial and humdrum on examination, destroying
      bark and portions of the food it could not eat.

I recall their magnificence, now not more magnificent
than it is dim. It is difficult to recall the ornament,
   speech, and precise manner of what one might
      call the minor acquaintances twenty
         years back; but I shall not forget him—that Gilgamesh among
      the hairy carnivora—that cat with the

wedge-shaped, slate-gray marks on its forelegs and the resolute tail,
astringently remarking: "They have imposed on us with their pale
   half fledged protestations, trembling about
      in inarticulate frenzy, saying
         it is not for us to understand art; finding it
      all so difficult, examining the thing

as if it were inconceivably arcanic, as symmet-
rically frigid as if it had been carved out of chrysoprase
   or marble—strict with tension, malignant
      in its power over us and deeper
         than the sea when it proffers flattery in exchange for hemp,
      rye, flax, horses, platinum, timber, and fur.




Roses Only

You do not seem to realise that beauty is a liability rather than
   an asset—that in view of the fact that spirit creates form we are justified in supposing
      that you must have brains. For you, a symbol of the unit, stiff and sharp,
   conscious of surpassing by dint of native superiority and liking for everything
self-dependent, anything an

ambitious civilization might produce: for you, unaided to attempt through sheer
   reserve, to confute presumptions resulting from observation, is idle. You cannot make us
   think you a delightful happen-so. But rose, if you are brilliant, it
   is not because your petals are the without-which-nothing of pre-eminence. You would, minus thorns,
look like a what-is-this, a mere

peculiarity. They are not proof against a worm, the elements, or mildew
   but what about the predatory hand? What is brilliance without co-ordination? Guarding the
      infinitesimal pieces of your mind, compelling audience to
   the remark that it is better to be forgotten than to be remembered too violently,
your thorns are the best part of you.




The Fish

wade
through black jade.
   Of the crow-blue mussel shells, one
      keeps
      adjusting the ash heaps;
   opening and shutting itself like

an
injured fan.
   The barnacles which encrust the
      side
      of the wave, cannot hide
   there for the submerged shafts of the

sun,
split like spun
   glass, move themselves with spotlight swift-
      ness
      into the crevices—
   in and out, illuminating

the
turquoise sea
   of bodies. The water drives a
      wedge
      of iron through the iron edge
   of the cliff, whereupon the stars,

pink
rice grains, ink
   bespattered jelly-fish, crabs like
      green
      lilies and submarine
   toadstools, slide each on the other.

All
external
   marks of abuse are present on
      this
      defiant edifice—
   all the physical features of

ac-
cident—lack
   of cornice, dynamite grooves, burns
      and
      hatchet strokes, these things stand
   out on it; the chasm side is

dead.
Repeated
   evidence has proved that it can
      live
      on what cannot revive
   its youth. The sea grows old in it.




Black Earth

Openly, yes,
with the naturalness
   of the hippopotamus or the alligator
      when it climbs out on the bank to experience the

sun, I do these
things which I do, which please
   no one but myself. Now I breathe and now I am submerged;
      the blemishes stand up and shout when the object

in view was a
renaissance; shall I say
   the contrary? The sediment of the river which
      encrusts my joints, makes me very gray but I am used

to it, it may
remain there; do away
   with it and I am myself done away with, for the
      patina of circumstance can but enrich what was

there to begin
with. This elephant skin
   which I inhabit, fibered over like the shell of
      the coconut, this piece of black glass through which no light

can filter—cut
into checkers by rut
   upon rut of unpreventable experience—
      it is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the

hairy toed. Black
but beautiful, my back
   is full of the history of power. Of power? What
      is powerful and what is not? My soul shall never

be cut into
by a wooden spear; throughout
   childhood to the present time, the unity of
      life and death has been expressed by the circumference

described by my
trunk; nevertheless, I
   perceive feats of strength to be inexplicable after
      all; and I am on my guard; external poise, it

has its center
well nurtured—we know
   where—in pride, but spiritual poise, it has its center where?
      My ears are sensitized to more than the sound of

the wind. I see
and I hear, unlike the
   wandlike body of which one hears so much, which was made
      to see and not to see; to hear and not to hear;

that tree trunk without
roots, accustomed to shout
   its own thoughts to itself like a shell, maintained intact
      by one who knows what strange pressure of the atmosphere; that

spiritual
brother to the coral
   plant, absorbed into which, the equable sapphire light
      becomes a nebulous green. The I of each is to

the I of each,
a kind of fretful speech
   which sets a limit on itself; the elephant is?
      Black earth preceded by a tendril? It is to that

phenomenon
the above formation,
   translucent like the atmosphere—a cortex merely—
      that on which darts cannot strike decisively the first

time, a substance
needful as an instance
   of the indestructibility of matter; it
      has looked at the electricity and at the earth-

quake and is still
here; the name means thick. Will
   depth be depth, thick skin be thick, to one who can see no
      beautiful element of unreason under it?




Radical

Tapering
to a point, conserving everything,
   this carrot is predestined to be thick.
      The world is
      but a circumstance, a mis-
   erable corn-patch for its feet. With ambition, imagination, outgrowth,

nutriment,
with everything crammed belligerent-
   ly inside itself, its fibers breed mon-
      opoly—
      a tail-like, wedge-shaped engine with the
   secret of expansion, fused with intensive heat to color of the set-

ting sun and
stiff. For the man in the straw hat, stand-
   ing still and turning to look back at it,
      as much as
      to say my happiest moment has
   been funereal in comparison with this, the conditions of life pre-

determined
slavery to be easy and freedom hard. For
   it? Dismiss
      agrarian lore; it tells him this:
         that which it is impossible to force, it is impossible
         to hinder.




In the Days of Prismatic Color

not in the days of Adam and Eve but when Adam
   was alone; when there was no smoke and color was
fine, not with the fineness of
   early civilization art but by virtue
of its originality; with nothing to modify it but the

mist that went up, obliqueness was a varia-
   tion of the perpendicular, plain to see and
to account for: it is no
   longer that; nor did the blue red yellow band
of incandescence that was color keep its stripe: it also is one of

those things into which much that is peculiar can be
   read; complexity is not a crime but carry
it to the point of murkiness
   and nothing is plain. Complexity
moreover, that has been committed to darkness, instead of granting it-

self to be the pestilence that it is, moves all a-
   bout as if to bewilder us with the dismal
fallacy that insistence
   is the measure of achievement and that all
truth must be dark. Principally throat, sophistication is as it al-

ways has been—at the antipodes from the init-
   ial great truths. "Part of it was crawling, part of it
was about to crawl, the rest
   was torpid in its lair." In the short legged, fit-
ful advance, the gurgling and all the minutiae—we have the classic

multitude of feet. To what purpose! Truth is no Apollo
   Belvedere, no formal thing. The wave may go over it if it likes.
Know that it will be there when it says:
   "I shall be there when the wave has gone by.




Peter

Strong and slippery, built for the midnight grass-party confronted by four cats,
      he sleeps his time away—the detached first claw on his foreleg which corresponds
   to the thumb, retracted to its tip; the small tuft of fronds
      or katydid legs above each eye, still numbering the units in each group;
         the shadbones regularly set about his mouth, to droop or rise

in unison like the porcupine’s quills—motionless. He lets himself be flat-
      tened out by gravity, as it were a piece of seaweed tamed and weakened by
   exposure to the sun; compelled when extended, to lie
      stationary. Sleep is the result of his delusion that one must do as
         well as one can for oneself; sleep—epitome of what is to

him as to the average person, the end of life. Demonstrate on him how
      the lady caught the dangerous southern snake, placing a forked stick on either
   side of its innocuous neck; one need not try to stir
      him up; his prune shaped head and alligator eyes are not a party to the
         joke. Lifted and handled, he may be dangled like an eel or set

up on the forearm like a mouse; his eyes bisected by pupils of a pin’s
      width, are flickeringly exhibited, then covered up. May be? I should say,
   might have been; when he has been got the better of in a
      dream—as in a fight with nature or with cats—we all know it. Profound sleep is
         not with him, a fixed illusion. Springing about with froglike ac-

curacy, emitting jerky cries when taken in the hand, he is himself
      again; to sit caged by the rungs of a domestic chair would be unprofit-
   able—human. What is the good of hypocrisy? It
      is permissible to choose one’s employment, to abandon the wire nail, the
         roly-poly, when it shows signs of being no longer a pleas-

ure, to score the adjacent magazine with a double line of strokes. He can
      talk, but insolently says nothing. What of it? When one is frank, one’s very
   presence is a compliment. It is clear that he can see
      the virtue of naturalness, that he is one of those who do not regard
         the published fact as a surrender. As for the disposition

invariably to affront, an animal with claws wants to have to use
      them; that eel-like extension of trunk into tail is not an accident. To
   leap, to lengthen out, divide the air—to purloin, to pursue,
      to tell the hen: fly over the fence, go in the wrong way—in your perturbation—
         this is life; to do less would be nothing but dishonesty.




Picking and Choosing

Literature is a phase of life: if
   one is afraid of it, the situation is irremediable; if
one approaches it familiarly,
   what one says of it is worthless. Words are constructive
when they are true; the opaque allusion—the simulated flight

upward—accomplishes nothing. Why cloud the fact
   that Shaw is self-conscious in the field of sentiment but is otherwise re-
warding? that James is all that has been
   said of him, if feeling is profound? It is not Hardy
the distinguished novelist and Hardy the poet, but one man

"interpreting life through the medium of the
   emotions." If he must give an opinion, it is permissible that the
critic should know what he likes. Gordon
   Craig with his "this is I" and "this is mine," with his three
wise men, his "sad French greens" and his Chinese cherries—Gordon Craig, so

inclinational and unashamed—has carried
   the precept of being a good critic, to the last extreme; and Burke is a
psychologist—of acute, raccoon-
   like curiosity. Summa diligentia;
to the humbug, whose name is so amusing—very young and ve-

ry rushed, Caesar crossed the Alps on the "top of a
   diligence." We are not daft about the meaning but this familiarity
with wrong meanings puzzles one. Humming-
   bug, the candles are not wired for electricity.
Small dog, going over the lawn, nipping the linen and saying

that you have a badger—remember Xenophon;
   only the most rudimentary sort of behavior necessary
to put us on the scent; "a right good
   salvo of barks," a few "strong wrinkles" puckering the
skin between the ears, are all we ask.




When I Buy Pictures

or what is closer to the truth,
when I look at that of which I may regard myself as the imaginary possessor,
I fix upon what would give me pleasure in my average moments:
the satire upon curiosity in which no more is discernible than the intensity of the mood;
or quite the opposite—the old thing, the medieval decorated hat-box,
in which there are hounds with waists diminishing like the waist of the hourglass
and deer and birds and seated people;
it may be no more than a square of parquetry; the literal biography perhaps,
in letters standing well apart upon a parchment-like expanse;
an artichoke in six varieties of blue; the snipe-legged hieroglyphic in three parts;
the silver fence protecting Adam’s grave, or Michael taking Adam by the wrist.
Too stern an intellectual emphasis upon this quality or that, detracts from one’s enjoyment;
it must not wish to disarm anything; nor may the approved triumph easily be honored—
that which is great because something else is small.
It comes to this: of whatever sort it is,
it must be "lit with piercing glances into the life of things";
it must acknowledge the spiritual forces which have made it.




A Grave

Man looking into the sea,
taking the view from those who have as much right to it as you have to it yourself,
it is human nature to stand in the middle of a thing
but you cannot stand in the middle of this:
the sea has nothing to give but a well excavated grave.
The firs stand in a procession, each with an emerald turkey-foot at the top,
reserved as their contours, saying nothing;
repression, however, is not the most obvious characteristic of the sea;
the sea is a collector, quick to return a rapacious look.
There are others besides you who have worn that look—
whose expression is no longer a protest; the fish no longer investigate them
for their bones have not lasted:
men lower nets, unconscious of the fact that they are desecrating a grave,
and row quickly away—the blades of the oars
moving together like the feet of water-spiders as if there were no such thing as death.
The wrinkles progress upon themselves in a phalanx—beautiful under networks of foam,
and fade breathlessly while the sea rustles in and out of the seaweed;
the birds swim through the air at top speed, emitting catcalls as heretofore—
the tortoise-shell scourges about the feet of the cliffs, in motion beneath them
and the ocean, under the pulsation of lighthouse and noise of bell-buoys,
advances as usual, looking as if it were not that ocean in which dropped things are bound to sink—
in which if they turn and twist, it is neither with volition nor consciousness.




Those Various Scalpels

Those
various sounds consistently indistinct, like intermingled echoes
   struck from thin glasses successively at random—the
   inflection disguised: your hair, the tails of two fighting-cocks head to head in stone—like sculptured scimitars re-
      peating the curve of your ears in reverse order: your eyes, flowers of ice

and
snow sown by tearing winds on the cordage of disabled ships: your raised hand
   an ambiguous signature: your cheeks, those rosettes
   of blood on the stone floors of French châteaux, with regard to which the guides are so affirmative:
      your other hand

a
bundle of lances all alike, partly hid by emeralds from Persia
   and the fractional magnificence of Florentine
   goldwork—a collection of half a dozen little objects made fine
      with enamel in gray, yellow, and dragon fly blue; a lemon, a

pear
and three bunches of grapes, tied with silver: your dress, a magnificent square
   cathedral of uniform
   and at the same time, diverse appearance—a species of vertical vineyard rustling in the storm
      of conventional opinion. Are they weapons or scalpels? Whetted

to
brilliance by the hard majesty of that sophistication which is su-
   perior to opportunity, these things are rich
   instruments with which to experiment but surgery is not tentative. Why dissect destiny with instruments which
      are more highly specialized than the tissues of destiny itself?




New York

the savage’s romance,
accreted where we need the space for commerce—
the center of the wholesale fur trade,
starred with tepees of ermine and peopled with foxes,
the long guard-hairs waving two inches beyond the body of the pelt;
the ground dotted with deer-skins—white with white spots
"as satin needlework in a single color may carry a varied pattern,"
and wilting eagles’ down compacted by the wind;
and picardels of beaver skin; white ones alert with snow.
It is a far cry from the "queen full of jewels"
and the beau with the muff,
from the gilt coach shaped like a perfume bottle,
to the conjunction of the Monongahela and the Allegheny,
and the scholastic philosophy of the wilderness
to combat which one must stand outside and laugh
since to go in is to be lost.
It is not the dime-novel exterior,
Niagara Falls, the calico horses and the war canoe;
it is not that "if the fur is not finer than such as one sees others wear,
one would rather be without it—"
that estimated in raw meat and berries, we could feed the universe;
it is not the atmosphere of ingenuity,
the otter, the beaver, the puma skins
without shooting-irons or dogs;
it is not the plunder,
it is the "accessibility to experience.




People’s Surroundings

they answer one’s questions:
a deal table compact with the wall;
in this dried bone of arrangement,
one’s "natural promptness" is compressed, not crowded out;
one’s style is not lost in such simplicity:

the palace furniture, so old fashioned, so old fashionable;
Sèvres china and the fireplace dogs—
bronze dromios with pointed ears, as obsolete as pugs;
one has one’s preference in the matter of bad furniture
and this is not one’s choice:

the vast indestructible necropolis
of composite Yawman-Erbe separable units;
the steel, the oak, the glass, the Poor Richard publications
containing the public secrets of efficiency
on "paper so thin that one thousand four hundred and twenty pages make one inch,"
exclaiming so to speak, When you take my time, you take something I had meant to use:

the highway hid by fir trees in rhododendron twenty feet deep,
the peacocks, hand-forged gates, old Persian velvet—
roses outlined in pale black on an ivory ground—
the pierced iron shadows of the cedars,
Chinese carved glass, old Waterford,
lettered ladies; landscape gardening twisted into permanence:

straight lines over such great distances as one finds in Utah or in Texas
where people do not have to be told
that "a good brake is as important as a good motor,"
where by means of extra sense cells in the skin,
they can like trout, smell what is coming—
those cool sirs with the explicit sensory apparatus of common sense,
who know the exact distance between two points as the crow flies;
there is something attractive about a mind that moves in a straight line—
the municipal bat-roost of mosquito warfare, concrete statuary,
medicaments for "instant beauty" in the hands of all,
and that live wire, the American string quartet:

and Bluebeard’s tower above the coral reefs,
the magic mousetrap closing on all points of the compass,
capping like petrified surf, the furious azure of the bay
where there is no dust and life is like a lemon-leaf,
a green piece of tough translucent parchment,
where the crimson, the copper, and the Chinese vermilion of the poincianas
set fire to the masonry and turquoise blues refute the clock;
this dungeon with odd notions of hospitality,
with its "chessmen carved out of moonstones,"
its mocking-birds, fringed lilies, and hibiscus,
its black butterflies with blue half circles on their wings,
tan goats with onyx ears, its lizards glittering and without thickness
like splashes of fire and silver on the pierced turquoise of the lattices
and the acacia-like lady shivering at the touch of a hand,
lost in a small collision of the orchids—
dyed quicksilver let fall
to disappear like an obedient chameleon in fifty shades of mauve and amethyst:
here where the mind of this establishment has come to the conclusion
that it would be impossible to revolve about one’s self too much,
sophistication has like "an escalator, cut the nerve of progress."

In these noncommittal, personal-impersonal expressions of appearance,
the eye knows what to skip;
the physiognomy of conduct must not reveal the skeleton;
"a setting must not have the air of being one"
yet with x-raylike inquisitive intensity upon it, the surfaces go back;
the interfering fringes of expression are but a stain on what stands out,
there is neither up nor down to it;
we see the exterior and the fundamental structure—
captains of armies, cooks, carpenters,
cutlers, gamesters, surgeons and armorers,
lapidaries, silkmen, glovers, fiddlers and ballad-singers,
sextons of churches, dyers of black cloth, hostlers and chimney-sweeps,
queens, countesses, ladies, emperors, travelers and mariners,
dukes, princes and gentlemen
in their respective places—
camps, forges and battlefields,
conventions, oratories and wardrobes,
dens, deserts, railway stations, asylums and places where engines are made,
shops, prisons, brickyards and altars of churches—
in magnificent places clean and decent,
castles, palaces, dining-halls, theatres and imperial audience-chambers.




Snakes, Mongooses, Snake-Charmers, and the Like

I have a friend who would give a price for those long fingers all of one length—
those hideous bird’s claws, for that exotic asp and the mongoose—
products of the country in which everything is hard work, the country of the grass-getter,
the torch-bearer, the dog-servant, the message-bearer, the holy-man.
Engrossed in this distinguished worm nearly as wild and as fierce as the day it was captured,
he gazes as if incapable of looking at anything with a view to analysis.
"The slight snake rippling quickly through the grass,
the leisurely tortoise with its pied back,
the chameleon passing from twig to stone, from stone to straw,"
lit his imagination at one time; his admiration now converges upon this:
thick, not heavy, it stands up from its traveling-basket,
the essentially Greek, the plastic animal, all of a piece from nose to tail;
one is compelled to look at it as at the shadows of the alps
imprisoning in their folds like flies in amber, the rhythms of the skating-rink.
This animal to which from the earliest times, importance has attached,
fine as its worshippers have said—for what was it invented?
To show that when intelligence in its pure form
has embarked on a train of thought which is unproductive, it will come back?
We do not know; the only positive thing about it is its shape, but why protest?
The passion for setting people right is in itself an afflictive disease.
Distaste which takes no credit to itself is best.




Bowls

on the green
with lignum vitae balls and ivory markers,
the pins planted in wild duck formation,
and quickly dispersed:
by this survival of ancient punctilio
in the manner of Chinese lacquer carving,
layer after layer exposed by certainty of touch and unhurried incision
so that only so much color shall be revealed as is necessary to the picture
I learn that we are precisians—
not citizens of Pompeii arrested in action
as a cross section of one’s correspondence would seem to imply.
Renouncing a policy of boorish indifference
to everything that has been said since the days of Matilda,
I shall purchase an Etymological Dictionary of Modern English
that I may understand what is written
and like the ant and the spider
returning from time to time to headquarters,
shall answer the question
as to "why I like winter better than I like summer"
and acknowledge that it does not make me sick
to look modern playwrights and poets and novelists straight in the face—
that I feel just the same;
and I shall write to the publisher of the magazine
which will "appear the first day of the month
and disappear before one has had time to buy it
unless one takes proper precaution,"
and make an effort to please—
since he who gives quickly gives twice
in nothing so much as in a letter.




Novices

anatomize their work
in the sense in which Will Honeycomb was jilted by a duchess,
the little assumptions of the scared ego confusing the issue
so that they do not know "whether it is the buyer or the seller who gives the money"—
an abstruse idea plain to none but the artist,
the only seller who buys, and holds on to the money.
Because one expresses oneself and entitles it wisdom, one is not a fool. What an idea!
"Dracontine cockatrices, perfect and poisonous from the beginning,"
they present themselves as a contrast to sea-serpented regions "unlit by the half-lights of more conscious art."
Acquiring at thirty what at sixty they will be trying to forget,
blind to the right word, deaf to satire
which like "the smell of the cypress strengthens the nerves of the brain,"
averse from the antique
with "that tinge of sadness about it which a reflective mind always feels,
it is so little and so much"—
they write the sort of thing that would in their judgment interest a lady;
curious to know if we do not adore each letter of the alphabet that goes to make a word of it—
according to the Act of Congress, the sworn statement of the treasurer and all the rest of it—
the counterpart to what we are:
stupid man; men are strong and no one pays any attention:
stupid woman; women have charm and how annoying they can be.
Yes, "the authors are wonderful people, particularly those that write the most,"
the masters of all languages, the supertadpoles of expression.
Accustomed to the recurring phosphorescence of antiquity,
the "much noble vagueness and indefinite jargon" of Plato,
the lucid movements of the royal yacht upon the learned scenery of Egypt—
king, steward, and harper seated amidships while the jade and the rock crystal course about in solution,
their suavity surmounts the surf—
the willowy wit, the transparent equation of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel.
Bored by "the detailless perspective of the sea," reiterative and naive,
and its chaos of rocks—the stuffy remarks of the Hebrews—
the good and alive young men demonstrate the assertion
that it is not necessary to be associated with that which has bored one;
they have never made a statement which they found so easy to prove—
"split like a glass against a wall"
in this "precipitate of dazzling impressions,
the spontaneous unforced passion of the Hebrew language—
an abyss of verbs full of reverberations and tempestuous energy,"
in which action perpetuates action and angle is at variance with angle
till submerged by the general action;
obscured by "fathomless suggestions of color,"
by incessantly panting lines of green, white with concussion,
in this drama of water against rocks—this "ocean of hurrying consonants"
with its "great livid stains like long slabs of green marble,"
its "flashing lances of perpendicular lightning" and "molten fires swallowed up,"
"with foam on its barriers,"
"crashing itself out in one long hiss of spray.




Marriage

This institution,
perhaps one should say enterprise
out of respect for which
one says one need not change one’s mind
about a thing one has believed in,
requiring public promises
of one’s intention
to fulfill a private obligation:
I wonder what Adam and Eve
think of it by this time,
this firegilt steel
alive with goldenness;
how bright it shows—
"of circular traditions and impostures,
committing many spoils,"
requiring all one’s criminal ingenuity
to avoid!
Psychology which explains everything
explains nothing
and we are still in doubt.
Eve: beautiful woman—
I have seen her
when she was so handsome
she gave me a start,
able to write simultaneously
in three languages—
English, German and French
and talk in the meantime;
equally positive in demanding a commotion
and in stipulating quiet:
"I should like to be alone";
to which the visitor replies,
"I should like to be alone;
why not be alone together?"
Below the incandescent stars
below the incandescent fruit,
the strange experience of beauty;
its existence is too much;
it tears one to pieces
and each fresh wave of consciousness
is poison.
"See her, see her in this common world,"
the central flaw
in that first crystal-fine experiment,
this amalgamation which can never be more
than an interesting impossibility,
describing it
as "that strange paradise
unlike flesh, gold, or stately buildings,
the choicest piece of my life:
the heart rising
in its estate of peace
as a boat rises
with the rising of the water";
constrained in speaking of the serpent—
that shed snakeskin in the history of politeness
not to be returned to again—
that invaluable accident
exonerating Adam.
And he has beauty also;
it’s distressing—the O thou
to whom, from whom,
without whom nothing—Adam;
"something feline,
something colubrine"—how true!
a crouching mythological monster
in that Persian miniature of emerald mines,
raw silk—ivory white, snow white,
oyster white and six others—
that paddock full of leopards and giraffes—
long lemon-yellow bodies
sown with trapezoids of blue.
Alive with words,
vibrating like a cymbal
touched before it has been struck,
he has prophesied correctly—
the industrious waterfall,
"the speedy stream
which violently bears all before it,
at one time silent as the air
and now as powerful as the wind."
"Treading chasms
on the uncertain footing of a spear,"
forgetting that there is in woman
a quality of mind
which as an instinctive manifestation
is unsafe,
he goes on speaking
in a formal, customary strain
of "past states, the present state,
seals, promises,
the evil one suffered,
the good one enjoys,
hell, heaven,
everything convenient
to promote one’s joy."
There is in him a state of mind
by force of which,
perceiving what it was not
intended that he should,
"he experiences a solemn joy
in seeing that he has become an idol."
Plagued by the nightingale
in the new leaves,
with its silence—
not its silence but its silences,
he says of it:
"It clothes me with a shirt of fire."
"He dares not clap his hands
to make it go on
lest it should fly off;
if he does nothing, it will sleep;
if he cries out, it will not understand."
Unnerved by the nightingale
and dazzled by the apple,
impelled by "the illusion of a fire
effectual to extinguish fire,"
compared with which
the shining of the earth
is but deformity—a fire
"as high as deep as bright as broad
as long as life itself,"
he stumbles over marriage,
"a very trivial object indeed"
to have destroyed the attitude
in which he stood—
the ease of the philosopher
unfathered by a woman.
Unhelpful Hymen!
"a kind of overgrown cupid"
reduced to insignificance
by the mechanical advertising
parading as involuntary comment,
by that experiment of Adam’s
with ways out but no way in—
the ritual of marriage,
augmenting all its lavishness;
its fiddle-head ferns,
lotus flowers, opuntias, white dromedaries,
its hippopotamus—
nose and mouth combined
in one magnificent hopper,
"the crested screamer—
that huge bird almost a lizard,"
its snake and the potent apple.
He tells us
that "for love
that will gaze an eagle blind,
that is like a Hercules
climbing the trees
in the garden of the Hesperides,
from forty-five to seventy
is the best age,"
commending it
as a fine art, as an experiment,
a duty or as merely recreation.
One must not call him ruffian
nor friction a calamity—
the fight to be affectionate:
"no truth can be fully known
until it has been tried
by the tooth of disputation."
The blue panther with black eyes,
the basalt panther with blue eyes,
entirely graceful—
one must give them the path—
the black obsidian Diana
who "darkeneth her countenance
as a bear doth,
causing her husband to sigh,"
the spiked hand
that has an affection for one
and proves it to the bone,
impatient to assure you
that impatience is the mark of independence
not of bondage.
"Married people often look that way"—
"seldom and cold, up and down,
mixed and malarial
with a good day and bad."
"When do we feed?"
We occidentals are so unemotional,
we quarrel as we feed;
one’s self quite lost,
the irony preserved
in "the Ahasuerus tête à tête banquet"
with its "good monster, lead the way,"
with little laughter
and munificence of humor
in that quixotic atmosphere of frankness
in which "Four o’clock does not exist
but at five o’clock
the ladies in their imperious humility
are ready to receive you";
in which experience attests
that men have power
and sometimes one is made to feel it.
He says, "What monarch would not blush
to have a wife
with hair like a shaving-brush?
The fact of woman
is not ‘the sound of the flute
but very poison."
She says, "‘Men are monopolists
of stars, garters, buttons
and other shining baubles’—
unfit to be the guardians
of another person’s happiness."
He says, "These mummies
must be handled carefully—
‘the crumbs from a lion’s meal,
a couple of shins and the bit of an ear’;
turn to the letter M
and you will find
that ‘a wife is a coffin,’
that severe object
with the pleasing geometry
stipulating space and not people,
refusing to be buried
and uniquely disappointing,
revengefully wrought in the attitude
of an adoring child
to a distinguished parent."
She says, "This butterfly,
this waterfly, this nomad
that has ‘proposed
to settle on my hand for life.’—
What can one do with it?
There must have been more time
in Shakespeare’s day
to sit and watch a play.
You know so many artists who are fools."
He says, "You know so many fools
who are not artists."
The fact forgot
that "some have merely rights
while some have obligations,"
he loves himself so much,
he can permit himself
no rival in that love.
She loves herself so much,
she cannot see herself enough—
a statuette of ivory on ivory,
the logical last touch
to an expansive splendor
earned as wages for work done:
one is not rich but poor
when one can always seem so right.
What can one do for them—
these savages
condemned to disaffect
all those who are not visionaries
alert to undertake the silly task
of making people noble?
This model of petrine fidelity
who "leaves her peaceful husband
only because she has seen enough of him"–
that orator reminding you,
"I am yours to command."
"Everything to do with love is mystery;
it is more than a day’s work
to investigate this science."
One sees that it is rare—
that striking grasp of opposites
opposed each to the other, not to unity,
which in cycloid inclusiveness
has dwarfed the demonstration
of Columbus with the egg—
a triumph of simplicity—
that charitive Euroclydon
of frightening disinterestedness
which the world hates,
admitting:

      "I am such a cow,
      if I had a sorrow,
      I should feel it a long time;
      I am not one of those
      who have a great sorrow
      in the morning
      and a great joy at noon";

which says: "I have encountered it
among those unpretentious
protegés of wisdom,
where seeming to parade
as the debater and the Roman,
the statesmanship
of an archaic Daniel Webster
persists to their simplicity of temper
as the essence of the matter:

      ‘Liberty and union
      now and forever’;

the book on the writing-table;
the hand in the breast-pocket.




Silence

My father used to say,
"Superior people never make long visits,
have to be shown Longfellow’s grave
nor the glass flowers at Harvard.
Self reliant like the cat—
that takes its prey to privacy,
the mouse’s limp tail hanging like a shoelace from its mouth—
they sometimes enjoy solitude,
and can be robbed of speech
by speech which has delighted them.
The deepest feeling always shows itself in silence;
not in silence, but restraint."
Nor was he insincere in saying, "‘Make my house your inn.’"
Inns are not residences.




An Octopus

of ice. Deceptively reserved and flat,
it lies "in grandeur and in mass"
beneath a sea of shifting snow dunes;
dots of cyclamen red and maroon on its clearly defined pseudopodia
made of glass that will bend—a much needed invention—
comprising twenty-eight ice fields from fifty to five hundred feet thick,
of unimagined delicacy.
"Picking periwinkles from the cracks"
or killing prey with the concentric crushing rigor of the python,
it hovers forward "spider fashion
on its arms" misleadingly like lace;
its "ghostly pallor changing
to the green metallic tinge of an anemone starred pool."
The fir trees in "the magnitude of their root systems,"
rise aloof from these maneuvers "creepy to behold,"
austere specimens of our American royal families,
"each like the shadow of the one beside it.
The rock seems frail compared with their dark energy of life,"
its vermilion and onyx and manganese blue interior expensiveness
left at the mercy of the weather;
"stained transversely by iron where the water drips down,"
recognized by its plants and its animals.
Completing a circle,
you have been deceived into thinking that you have progressed,
under the polite needles of the larches
"hung to filter not to intercept the sunlight"—
met by tightly wattled spruce twigs
"conformed to an edge like clipped cypress
as if no branch could penetrate the cold beyond its company";
and dumps of gold and silver ore enclosing The Goat’s Mirror—
that lady-fingerlike depression in the shape of the left human foot,
which prejudices you in favor of itself
before you have had time to see the others;
its indigo, pea-green, blue-green, and turquoise,
from a hundred to two hundred feet deep,
"merging in irregular patches in the middle lake
where like gusts of a storm
obliterating the shadows of the fir trees, the wind makes lanes of ripples."
What spot could have merits of equal importance
for bears, elk, deer, wolves, goats, and ducks?
Preempted by their ancestors,
this is the property of the exacting porcupine,
and of the rat "slipping along to its burrow in the swamp
or pausing on high ground to smell the heather";
of "thoughtful beavers
making drains which seem the work of careful men with shovels,"
and of the bears inspecting unexpectedly
ant hills and berry bushes.
Composed of calcium gems and alabaster pillars,
topaz, tourmaline crystals and amethyst quartz,
their den is somewhere else, concealed in the confusion
of "blue forests thrown together with marble and jasper and agate
as if whole quarries had been dynamited."
And farther up, in stag-at-bay position
as a scintillating fragment of these terrible stalagmites,
stands the goat,
its eye fixed on the waterfall which never seems to fall—
an endless skein swayed by the wind,
immune to force of gravity in the perspective of the peaks.
A special antelope
acclimated to "grottoes from which issue penetrating draughts
which make you wonder why you came,"
it stands its ground
on cliffs the color of the clouds, of petrified white vapor—
black feet, eyes, nose, and horns engraved on dazzling ice-fields,
the ermine body on the crystal peak;
the sun kindling its shoulders to maximum heat like acetylene, dyeing them white—
upon this antique pedestal—
"a mountain with those graceful lines which prove it a volcano,"
its top a complete cone like Fujiyama’s
till an explosion blew it off.
Maintaining many minds, distinguished by a beauty
of which "the visitor dare never fully speak at home
for fear of being stoned as an imposter,"
Big Snow Mountain is the home of a diversity of creatures:
those who "have lived in hotels
but who now live in camps—who prefer to";
the mountain guide evolving from the trapper,
"in two pairs of trousers, the outer one older,
wearing slowly away from the feet to the knees";
"the nine-striped chipmunk
running with unmammallike agility along a log";
the water ouzel
with "its passion for rapids and high pressured falls,"
building under the arch of some tiny Niagara;
the white-tailed ptarmigan "in winter solid white,
feeding on heather bells and alpine buckwheat";
and the eleven eagles of the west,
"fond of the spring fragrance and the winter colors,"
used to the unegoistic action of the glaciers
and "several hours of frost every midsummer night."
"They make a nice appearance, don’t they,"
happy seeing nothing?
Perched on treacherous lava and pumice—
those unadjusted chimney-pots and cleavers
which stipulate "the names and addresses of persons to notify
in case of disaster—"
they hear the roar of ice and supervise the water
winding slowly through the cliffs,
the road "climbing like the thread
which forms the groove around a snail-shell,
doubling back and forth until where snow begins, it ends."
No "deliberate wide-eyed wistfulness" is here
among the boulders sunk in ripples and white water
where "when you hear the best wild music of the mountains it is sure to be a marmot,"
the victim on some slight observatory,
of "a struggle between curiosity and caution,"
inquiring what has scared it:
a stone from the moraine descending in leaps,
another marmot, or the spotted ponies with "glass eyes,"
brought up on frosty grass and flowers
and rapid draughts of ice water.
Instructed none knows how, to climb the mountain,
by "business men who as totemic scenery of Canada,
require for recreation,
three hundred and sixty-five holidays in the year,"
these conspicuously spotted little horses are peculiar;
hard to discern among the birch trees, ferns, and lily pads,
avalanche lilies, Indian paintbrushes,
bears’ ears and kittentails,
and miniature cavalcades of chlorophylless fungi
magnified in profile on the moss beds like moonstones in the water;
the cavalcade of calico competing
with the original American "menagerie of styles"
among the white flowers of the rhododendron surmounting rigid leaves
upon which moisture works its alchemy,
transmuting verdure into onyx.
Larkspur, blue pincushions, blue peas, and lupin;
white flowers with white, and red with red;
the blue ones "growing close together
so that patches of them look like blue water in the distance":
this arrangement of colors
as in Persian designs of hard stones with enamel,
forms a pleasing equation—
a diamond outside and inside, a white dot;
on the outside, a ruby; inside, a red dot;
black spots balanced with black
in the woodlands where fires have run over the ground—
separated by aspens, cat’s paws, and woolly sunflowers,
fireweed, asters, and Goliath thistles
"flowering at all altitudes as multiplicitous as barley,"
like pink sapphires in the pavement of the glistening plateau.
Inimical to "bristling, puny, swearing men
equipped with saws and axes,"
this treacherous glass mountain
admires gentians, lady’s slippers, harebells, mountain dryads,
and "Calypso, the goat flower—
that greenish orchid fond of snow"—
anomalously nourished upon shelving glacial ledges
where climbers have not gone or have gone timidly,
"the one resting his nerves while the other advanced,"
on this volcano with the blue jay, her principal companion.
"Hopping stiffly on sharp feet" like miniature icehacks—
"secretive, with a look of wisdom and distinction, but a villain,
fond of human society or the crumbs that go with it,"
he knows no Greek,
"that pride producing language,"
in which "rashness is rendered innocuous, and error exposed
by the collision of knowledge with knowledge."
"Like happy souls in Hell," enjoying mental difficulties,
the grasshoppers of Greece
amused themselves with delicate behavior
because it was "so noble and so fair";
not practiced in adapting their intelligence
to eagle traps and snowshoes,
to alpenstocks and other toys contrived by those
"alive to the advantage of invigorating pleasures."
Bows, arrows, oars, and paddles for which trees provide the wood,
in new countries are more eloquent than elsewhere—
augmenting evidence for the assertion
that essentially humane,
"the forest affords wood for dwellings and by its beauty stimulates
the moral vigor of its citizens."
The Greeks liked smoothness, distrusting what was back
of what could not be clearly seen,
resolving with benevolent conclusiveness,
"complexities which still will be complexities
as long as the world lasts";
ascribing what we clumsily call happiness,
to "an accident or a quality,
a spiritual substance or the soul itself,
an act, a disposition, or a habit,
or a habit infused to which the soul has been persuaded,
or something distinct from a habit, a power—"
such power as Adam had and we are still devoid of.
"Emotionally sensitive, their hearts were hard";
their wisdom was remote
from that of these odd oracles of cool official sarcasm,
upon this game preserve
where "guns, nets, seines, traps and explosives,
hired vehicles, gambling and intoxicants are prohibited,
disobedient persons being summarily removed
and not allowed to return without permission in writing."
It is self evident
that it is frightful to have everything afraid of one;
that one must do as one is told
and eat "rice, prunes, dates, raisins, hardtack, and tomatoes"
if one would "conquer the main peak" of Mount Tacoma
this fossil flower concise without a shiver,
intact when it is cut,
damned for its sacrosanct remoteness—
like Henry James "damned by the public for decorum";
not decorum, but restraint;
it was the love of doing hard things
that rebuffed and wore them out—a public out of sympathy with neatness.
Neatness of finish! Neatness of finish!
Relentless accuracy is the nature of this octopus
with its capacity for fact.
"Creeping slowly as with meditated stealth,
its arms seeming to approach from all directions,"
it receives one under winds that "tear the snow to bits
and hurl it like a sandblast,
shearing off twigs and loose bark from the trees."
Is tree the word for these strange things
"flat on the ground like vines";
some "bent in a half circle with branches on one side
suggesting dustbrushes, not trees;
some finding strength in union, forming little stunted groves,
their flattened mats of branches shrunk in trying to escape"
from the hard mountain "planed by ice and polished by the wind"—
the white volcano with no weather side;
the lightning flashing at its base,
rain falling in the valleys, and snow falling on the peak—
the glassy octopus symmetrically pointed,
its claw cut by the avalanche
"with a sound like the crack of a rifle,
in a curtain of powdered snow launched like a waterfall.




Sea Unicorns and Land Unicorns

with their respective lions—
"mighty monoceroses with immeasured tayles"—
these are those very animals
described by the cartographers of 1539,
defiantly revolving
in such a way that the hard steel
in the long keel of white exhibited in tumbling,
disperses giant weeds
and those sea snakes whose forms looped in the foam, "disquiet shippers."
Not ignorant of how a voyager obtained the horn of a sea unicorn
to give Queen Elizabeth
who thought it worth a hundred thousand pounds,
they persevere in swimming where they like,
finding the place where lions live in herds,
strewn on the beach like stones with lesser stones—
and bears are white;
discovering Antarctica, its penguin kings and icy spires,
and Sir John Hawkins’ Florida
"abounding in land unicorns and lions,
since where the one is,
its arch enemy cannot be missing."
Thus personalities by nature much opposed,
can be combined in such a way
that when they do agree, their unanimity is great,
"in politics, in trade, law, sport, religion,
china collecting, tennis, and church going."
You have remarked this fourfold combination of strange animals,
upon embroideries,
enwrought with "polished garlands" of agreeing indifference—
thorns, "myrtle rods, and shafts of bay,"
"cobwebs, and knotts, and mulberries"
of lapis lazuli and pomegranate and malachite—
Britannia’s sea unicorn with its rebellious child
now ostentatiously indigenous of the new English coast
and its land lion oddly tolerant of those pacific counterparts to it,
the water lions of the west.
This is a strange fraternity—these sea lions and land lions,
land unicorns and sea unicorns:
the lion civilly rampant,
tame and concessive like the long-tailed bear of Ecuador—
the lion standing up against this screen of woven air
which is the forest:
the unicorn also, on its hind legs in reciprocity.
A puzzle to the hunters, is this haughtiest of beasts,
to be distinguished from those born without a horn,
in use like Saint Jerome’s tame lion, as domestics,
rebelling proudly at the dogs
which are dismayed by the chain lightning
playing at them from its horn—
the dogs persistent in pursuit of it as if it could be caught,
"deriving agreeable terror" from its "moonbeam throat"
on fire like its white coat and unconsumed as if of salamander’s skin.
So wary as to disappear for centuries and reappear,
yet never to be caught,
the unicorn has been preserved
by an unmatched device
wrought like the work of expert blacksmiths,
with which nothing can compare—
this animal of that one horn
throwing itself upon which head foremost from a cliff,
it walks away unharmed,
proficient in this feat, which like Herodotus,
I have not seen except in pictures.
Thus this strange animal with its miraculous elusiveness,
has come to be unique,
"impossible to take alive,"
tamed only by a lady inoffensive like itself—
as curiously wild and gentle;
"as straight and slender as the crest,
or antlet of the one-beam’d beast."
Upon the printed page,
also by word of mouth,
we have a record of it all
and how, unfearful of deceit,
etched like an equine monster on an old celestial map,
beside a cloud or dress of Virgin-Mary blue,
improved "all over slightly with snakes of Venice gold,
and silver, and some O’s,"
the unicorn "with pavon high," approaches eagerly;
until engrossed by what appears of this strange enemy,
upon the map, "upon her lap,"
its "mild wild head doth lie.




The Steeple-Jack

Dürer would have seen a reason for living
   in a town like this, with eight stranded whales
to look at; with the sweet sea air coming into your house
on a fine day, from water etched
   with waves as formal as the scales
on a fish.

One by one, in two’s, in three’s, the seagulls keep
   flying back and forth over the town clock,
or sailing around the lighthouse without moving the wings—
rising steadily with a slight
   quiver of the body—or flock
mewing where

a sea the purple of the peacock’s neck is
   paled to greenish azure as Dürer changed
the pine green of the Tyrol to peacock blue and guinea
grey. You can see a twenty-five
   pound lobster; and fishnets arranged
to dry. The

whirlwind fifeanddrum of the storm bends the salt
   marsh grass, disturbs stars in the sky and the
star on the steeple; it is a privilege to see so
much confusion. Disguised by what
   might seem austerity, the seaside
flowers and

trees are favored by the fog so that you have
   the tropics at first hand: the trumpet-vine,
fox-glove, giant snap-dragon, a salpiglossis that has
spots and stripes; morning-glories, gourds,
   or moon-vines trained on fishing-twine
at the back

door; cat-tails, flags, blueberries and spiderwort,
   striped grass, lichens, sunflowers, asters, daisies—
the yellow and the crab-claw blue ones with green bracts—toad-plant,
petunias, ferns; pink lilies, blue
   ones, tigers; poppies; black sweet-peas.
The climate

is not right for the banyan, frangipani, the
   jack-fruit tree; nor for exotic serpent
life. Ring lizard and snake-skin for the foot if you see fit,
but here they’ve cats not cobras to
   keep down the rats. The diffident
little newt

with white pin-dots on black horizontal spaced
   out bands lives here; yet there is nothing that
ambition can buy or take away. The college student
named Ambrose sits on the hill-side
   with his not-native books and hat
and sees boats

at sea progress white and rigid as if in
   a groove. Liking an elegance of which
the source is not bravado, he knows by heart the antique
sugar-bowl shaped summer-house of
   interlacing slats, and the pitch
of the church

spire, not true, from which a man in scarlet lets
   down a rope as a spider spins a thread;
he might be part of a novel, but on the sidewalk a
sign says C. J. Poole, Steeple-jack,
   in black and white; and one in red
and white says

Danger. The church portico has four fluted
   columns, each a single piece of stone, made
modester by white-wash. This would be a fit haven for
waifs, children, animals, prisoners,
   and presidents who have repaid
sin-driven

senators by not thinking about them. There
   are a school-house, a post-office in a
store, fish-houses, hen-houses, a three-masted schooner on
the stocks. The hero, the student,
   the steeple-jack, each in his way,
is at home.

It could not be dangerous to be living
   in a town like this, of simple people,
who have a steeple-jack placing danger signs by the church
while he is gilding the solidpointed
   star, which on a steeple
stands for hope.




The Student

In America everybody must have a degree," the French man
says, "but the French do not think that all can have it; they don’t
   say everyone must go to college." We
   may feel as he says we do; five kinds of superiority

might be unattainable by all, but one degree is not too much.
In each school there is a pair of fruit-trees like that twin tree
   in every other school: tree-of-knowledge—
   tree-of-life—each with a label like that of the other college:

lux, or lux et veritas, Christo et ecclesiae, sapiet
felici, and if science confers immortality,
   these apple-trees should be for everyone.
   Oriental arbor vitae we say lightly. Yet you pardon

it as when one thinking of the navy does not know not to infer
dishonorable discharge from a D. D. It is a
   thoughtful pupil has two thoughts for the word
   valet; or for bachelor, child, damsel; though no one having heard

them used as terms of chivalry would make the medieval use of
them. Secluded from domestic strife, Jack Bookworm led a
   college life says Goldsmith. He might not say
   it of the student who shows interest in the stranger’s resumé

by asking "when will your experiment be finished, Doctor Einstein?"
and is pleased when Doctor Einstein smiles and says politely
   "science is never finished." But we’re not
   hypocrites, we’re rustics. The football huddle in the vacant lot

is impersonating calculus and physics and military
books; and is gathering the data for genetics. If
   scholarship would profit by it, sixteenfoot
   men should be grown; it’s for the football men to say. We must lean

on their experience. There is vitality in the world of sport.
If it is not the tree of knowledge, it’s the tree of life.
   When Audubon adopted us he taught
   us how to dance. It was the great crab-flounder of Montana caught

and changed from that which creeps to that which is angelic. He taught us how
to turn as the airport wind-sock turns without an error;
   like Alligator, Downpour, Dynamite,
   and Wotan, gliding round the course in a fast neat school, with the white

of the eye showing; or as sea-lions keep going round and round the
pool. But there is more to learn—the difference between cow
   and zebu; lion, tiger; barred and brown
   owls; horned owls have one ear that opens up and one that opens down.

The golden eagle is the one with feathered legs. The penguin wing is
ancient, not degenerate. Swordfish are different from
   gars, if one may speak of gars when the big
   gamehunters are using the fastidious singular—say pig,

and that they have seen camelsparrow, tigerhorse, rat, mouse, butterfly,
snake, elephant, fruit-bat, et cet’ra. No fact of science—
   theology or biology—might
   not as well be known; one does not care to hold opinions that fright

could dislocate. Education augments our natural forces and
prompts us to extend the machinery of advantage
   to those who are without it. One fitted
   to be a scholar must have the heroic mind, Emerson said.

The student concentrates and does not like to fight; "gives his opinion
firmly and rests on it"—in the manner of the poet;
   is reclusive, and reserved; and has such
   ways, not because he has no feeling but because he has so much.

Boasting provokes jibes, and in this country we’ve no cause to boast; we are
as a nation perhaps, undergraduates not students.
   But anyone who studies will advance.
   Are we to grow up or not? They are not all college boys in France.




No Swan So Fine

"No water so still as the
   dead fountains of Versailles." No swan,
with swart blind look askance
and gondoliering legs, so fine
   as the chintz china one with fawn-
brown eyes and toothed gold
collar on to show whose bird it was.

Lodged in the Louis Fifteenth
   candelabrum-tree of cockscomb-
tinted buttons, dahlias,
sea-urchins, and everlastings,
   it perches on the branching foam
of polished sculptured
flowers—at ease and tall. The king is dead.




Too Much

A Roman hired an
artist, a freedman,
   to make a cone—pine-cone
   or fir-cone—with holes for a fountain. Placed on
      the Prison of St. Angelo, this cone
      of the Pompeys which is known

now as the Popes’, passed
for art. A huge cast
   bronze, dwarfing the peacock
   statue in the garden of the Vatican,
      it looks like a work of art made to give
      to a Pompey, or native

of Thebes. Others could
build, and understood
   making colossi and
   how to use slaves, and kept crocodiles and put
      baboons on the necks of giraffes to pick
      fruit, and used serpent magic.

They had their men tie
hippopotami
   and bring out dapple dogcats
   to course antelopes, dikdik, and ibex;
      or used small eagles. They looked on as theirs,
      impalas and onagers,

the wild ostrich herd
with hard feet and bird
   necks rearing back in the
   dust like a serpent preparing to strike, cranes,
      storks, anoas, mongooses, and Nile geese.
      And there were gardens for these—

combining planes, dates,
limes, and pomegranates,
   in avenues—with square
   pools of pink flowers, tame fish, and small frogs. Besides
      yarns dyed with indigo, and red cotton,
      they had a flax which they spun

into fine linen
cordage for yachtsmen.
   These people liked small things;
   they gave to boys little paired playthings such as
      nests of eggs, ichneumon and snake, paddle
      and raft, badger and camel;

and made toys for them-
selves: the royal totem;
   and toilet-boxes marked
   with the contents. Lords and ladies put goose-grease
      paint in round bone boxes with pivoting
      lid incised with the duck-wing

or reverted duck-
head; kept in a buck
   or rhinoceros horn,
   the ground horn; and locust oil in stone locusts.
      It was a picture with a fine distance;
      of drought, and of assistance

in time, from the Nile
rising slowly, while
   the pig-tailed monkey on
   slab-hands, with arched-up slack-slung gait, and the brown
      dandy, looked at the jasmine two-leafed twig
      and bud, cactus-pads, and fig.

Dwarfs here and there, lent
to an evident
   poetry of frog grays,
   duck-egg greens, and egg-plant blues, a fantasy
      and a verisimilitude that were
      right to those with, everywhere,

power over the poor.
The bees’ food is your
   food. Those who tended flowerbeds
   and stables were like the king’s cane in the
      form of a hand, or the folding bedroom
      made for his mother of whom

he was fond. Princes
clad in queens’ dresses
   calla or petunia
   white that trembled at the edge, and queens in a
      king’s underskirt of fine-twilled thread like silk-
      worm gut, as bee-man and milk-

maid, kept divine cows
and bees; limestone brows,
   and gold-foil wings. They made
   basalt serpents and portraits of beetles; the
      king gave his name to them and he was named
for them. He feared snakes and tamed

Pharaoh’s rat, the rust-
backed mongoose. No bust
   of it was made, but there
   was pleasure for the rat. Its restlessness was
      its excellence; it was praised for its wit;
      and the jerboa, like it,

a small desert rat,
and not famous, that
   lives without water, has
   happiness. Abroad seeking food, or at home
      in its burrow, the Sahara field-mouse
      has a shining silver house

of sand. O rest and
joy, the boundless sand,
   the stupendous sand-spout,
   no water, no palm-trees, no ivory bed,
      tiny cactus; but one would not be he
      who has nothing but plenty.




In Costa Rica

In blazing driftwood
   the green keeps showing at the same place;
as, intermittently, the fire-opal shows blue and green.
   In Costa Rica the true Chinese lizard face
is found, of the amphibious falling dragon, the living firework.

He leaps and meets his
   likeness in the stream and, king with king,
helped by his three-part plume along the back, runs on two legs,
   tail dragging; faints upon the air; then with a spring
dives to the stream-bed, hiding as the chieftain with gold body hid in

Guatavita Lake.
   He runs, he flies, he swims, to get to
his basilica—"the ruler of Rivers, Lakes, and Seas,
   invisible or visible," with clouds to do
as bid—and can be "long or short, and also coarse or fine at pleasure." With a

modest quiver, he
   ascends the bank on clinging tree-frog
hands, and waits; the water draining, forms a lizard there, from
   skin now looking a little newer than the log
it rested on & the thick mass of verdure all about. This is the

feather basilisk
   of travelers’ tales, of which a pair stood
bodyguard beside Confucius’ crib: aquatic flying
   lizard-fairy detested by such dragonhood
as Michael fought. One has seen animals like his, though smaller, collide

and fight, brother matched
   with brother, as if immune to pain;
push, struggle and breathe hard; swell out and muster strength, withdraw,
   advance; and swerving, almost fall—hoping to gain
the mortal hold and that some fang should pierce the marrow. But when plumet

territories touch,
   the masters of them are dramatic
without shedding blood, exerting charm as Chinese dragonwhiskers
   in a crystal handle charm; or as thickflowering
orchids gather dragons, in the east, by forming clouds for them.




The Malay Dragon

We have ours; and they
   have theirs. Ours has a skin feather crest;
theirs has wings out from the waist which is snuff-brown or sallow.
   Ours falls from trees on water; theirs is the smallest
dragon that knows how to dive head-first from a tree-top to something dry.

Floating on spread ribs,
   the boat-like body settles on the
clamshell-tinted spray sprung from the nutmeg-tree—minute legs
   trailing half akimbo—the true divinity
of Malay. Among unfragrant orchids, on the unnutritious nut

tree, myristica
   fragrans, the harmless god spreads ribs that
do not raise a hood. This is the serpent-dove peculiar
   to the East; that lives as the butterfly or bat
can, in a brood, conferring wings on what it grasps, as the air-plant does.




The Tuatera

Elsewhere, sea lizards—
   congregated so there is not room
to step, with tails laid criss-cross, alligator-style, among
   birds toddling in and out—are innocent of whom
they neighbor. Bird-reptile social life is pleasing. The tuatera

will tolerate a
   petrel in its den, and lays ten eggs
or nine—the number laid by dragons since "a true dragon
   has nine sons." The frilled lizard, the kind with no legs,
and the three-horned chameleon, are non-serious ones that take to flight

if you do not. In
   Copenhagen the principal door
of the bourse is roofed by two pairs of dragons standing on
   their heads—twirled by the architect—so that the four
green tails conspiring upright, symbolize four-fold security. Now,




The Frigate Pelican

Rapidly cruising or lying on the air there is a bird
   that realizes Rasselas’s friend’s project
   of wings uniting levity with strength. This
      hell-diver, frigate-bird, hurricane-
bird; unless swift is the proper word
      for him, the storm omen when
   he flies close to the waves, should be seen
      fishing, although oftener
      he appears to prefer

to take, on the wing, from industrious cruder-winged species
   the fish they have caught, and is seldom successless.
   A marvel of grace, no matter how fast his
      victim may fly or how often may
turn, the dishonest pelican’s ease
      in pursuit, bears him away
   with the fish that the badgered bird drops.
      A kind of superlative
      swallow, that likes to live

on food caught while flying, he is not a pelican. The toe
   with slight web, air-boned body, and very long wings
   with the spread of a swan’s—duplicating a
      bow-string as he floats overhead—feel
the changing V-shaped scissor swallow-
      tail direct the rigid keel.
   And steering beak to windward always,
      the fleetest foremost fairy
      among birds, outflies the

aeroplane which cannot flap its wings nor alter any quill-
   tip. For him, the feeling in a hand, in fins, is
   in his unbent downbent crafty oar. With him
      other pelicans aimlessly soar
as he does; separating, until
      not flapping they rise once more,
   closing in without looking and move
      outward again to the top
      of the circle and stop

and blow back, allowing the wind to reverse their direction.
   This is not the stalwart swan that can ferry the
   woodcutter’s two children home; no. Make hay; keep
      the shop; I have one sheep; were a less
limber animal’s mottoes. This one
      finds sticks for the swan’s-down dress
   of his child to rest upon and would
      not know Gretel from Hänsel.
      As impassioned Handel—

meant for a lawyer and a masculine German domestic
   career—clandestinely studied the harpsichord
   and never was known to have fallen in love,
      the unconfiding frigate-bird hides
in the height and in the majestic
      display of his art. He glides
   a hundred feet or quivers about
      as charred paper behaves—full
      of feints; and an eagle

of vigilance, earns the term aquiline; keeping at a height
   so great the feathers look black and the beak does not
   show. It is not retreat but exclusion from
      which he looks down and observes what went
secretly, as it thought, out of sight
      among dense jungle plants. Sent
   ahead of the rest, there goes the true
      knight in his jointed coat that
      covers all but his bat

ears; a-trot, with stiff pig gait—our tame armadillo, loosed by
   his master and as pleased as a dog. Beside the
   spattered blood—that orchid which the native fears—
      the fer-de-lance lies sleeping; centaur-
like, this harmful couple’s amity
      is apropos. A jaguar
   and crocodile are fighting. Sharp-shinned
      hawks and peacock-freckled small
      cats, like the literal

merry-go-round, come wandering within the circular view
   of the high bird for whom from the air they are ants
   keeping house all their lives in the crack of a
      crag with no view from the top. And here,
unlikely animals learning to
      dance, crouch on two steeds that rear
   behind a leopard with a frantic
      face, tamed by an Artemis
      who wears a dress like his,

and hampering haymaker’s hat. Festina lente. Be gay
   civilly. How so? "If I do well I am blessed
   whether any bless me or not, and if I do
      ill I am cursed." We watch the moon rise
on the Susquehanna. In his way
      this most romantic bird, flies
   to a more mundane place, the mangrove
      swamp, to sleep. He wastes the moon.
      But he, and others, soon

rise from the bough, and though flying are able to foil the tired
   moment of danger, that lays on heart and lungs the
   weight of the python that crushes to powder.
      The tune’s illiterate footsteps fail;
the steam hacks are not to be admired.
      These, unturbulent, avail
   themselves of turbulence to fly—pleased
      with the faint wind’s varyings,
      on which to spread fixed wings.

The reticent lugubrious ragged immense minuet
   descending to leeward, ascending to windward
   again without flapping, in what seems to be
      a way of resting, are now nearer,
but as seemingly bodiless yet
      as they were. Theirs are somber
   quills for so wide and lightboned a bird
      as the frigate pelican
      of the Caribbean.




The Buffalo

      Black in blazonry means
prudence; and niger, unpropitious. Might
hematite-
   black incurved compact horns on a bison
      have significance? The
   soot brown tail-tuft on
         a kind of lion-

      tail; what would that express?
And John Steuart Curry’s Ajax pulling
grass—no ring
   in his nose—two birds standing on his back?
      though prints like this cannot
   show if they were black
         birds, nor the color

      of the back. The modern
ox does not look like the Augsburg ox’s
portrait. Yes,
   the great extinct wild Aurochs was a beast
      to paint, with stripe and sixfoot
   horn-spread—decreased
         to Siamese-cat-

      Brown Swiss size, or zebu
shape with white plush dewlap and warm-blooded
hump; to red-
   skinned Hereford or to piebald Holstein. Yet
      some would say the sparse-haired
   buffalo has met
         human notions best—

      unlike the elephant,
both jewel and jeweler in the hairs
that he wears—
   no white-nosed Vermont ox yoked with its twin
      to haul the maple sap,
   up to their knees in
         snow; no freakishly

      Over-Drove Ox drawn by
Rowlandson, but the Indian buffalo,
albino-
   footed, standing in the mud-lake, with a
      day’s work to do. No white
   Christian heathen, waylaid
         by the Buddha,

      serves him so well as the
buffalo—as mettlesome as if check-
reined—free neck
   stretching out, and snake-tail in a half twist
      on the flank; nor will so
   cheerfully assist
         the Sage sitting with

      feet at the same side, to
dismount at the shrine; nor are there any
ivory
   tusks like those two horns which when a tiger
      coughs, are lowered fiercely
   and convert the fur
         to harmless rubbish.

      The Indian buffalo,
led by bare-leggèd herd-boys to a hay
hut where they
   stable it, need not fear comparison
      with bison, with the twins,
   nor with anyone
         of ox ancestry.




Nine Nectarines and Other Porcelain

   Arranged by two’s as peaches are,
at intervals that all may live—
   eight and a single one, on twigs that
   grew the year before—they look like
a derivative;
   although not uncommonly
the opposite is seen—
nine peaches on a nectarine.
   Fuzzless through slender crescent leaves
      of green or blue—or both,
      in the Chinese style—the four

   pairs’ half-moon leaf-mosaic turns
out to the sun the sprinkled blush
   of puce-American-Beauty pink
   applied to beeswax gray by the
unenquiring brush
   of mercantile bookbinding.
Like the peach Yu, the red-
cheeked peach which cannot aid the dead,
   but eaten in time prevents death,
      the Italian peachnut,
      Persian plum, Ispahan

   secluded wall-grown nectarine,
as wild spontaneous fruit was
   found in China first. But was it wild?
   Prudent de Candolle would not say.
We cannot find flaws
   in this emblematic group
of nine, with leaf window
unquilted by curculio—
   which someone once depicted on
      this much-mended plate; or
      in the also accurate

   unantlered moose, or Iceland horse,
or ass, asleep against the old
   thick, low-leaning nectarine that is the
   color of the shrub-tree’s brownish
flower. From manifold
   small boughs, productive as the
magic willow that grew
above the mother’s grave and threw
   on Cinderella what she wished,
      a bat is winging. It
      is a moonlight scene, bringing

   the animal so near, its eyes
are separate from the face—mere
   delicately drawn gray discs, out from
   itself in space. Imperial
happiness lives here
   on the peaches of long life
that make it permanent.
A fungus could have meant
   long life; a crane, a stork, a dove.
      China, with flowers and birds
      and half-beasts, became the land

   of the best china-making first.
Hunts and domestic scenes occur
   in France on dinner-plates, signed on the
   back with a two-finned fish; England
has an officer
   in jack-boots seated in a
bosquet, the cow, the flock
of sheep, the pheasant, the peacock
   sweeping near with lifted claw; the
      skilled peonian rose
      and the rosebud that began

   with William Billingsley (once poor,
like a monkey on a dolphin, tossed
   by Ocean, mighty monster) until
   Josiah Spode adopted him.
Yet with the gold-glossed
   serpent handles, are there green
cocks with "brown beaks and cheeks
and dark blue combs" and mammal freaks
   that, like the Chinese Certainties
      and sets of Precious Things,
      dare to be conspicuous?

   Theirs is a race that "understands
the spirit of the wilderness"
   and the nectarine-loving kylin
   of pony appearance—the long-
tailed or the tailless
   small cinnamon-brown common
camel-haired unicorn
with antelope feet and no horn,
   here enamelled on porcelain.
      It was a Chinese who
      imagined this masterpiece.




Pigeons

Older than the ancient Greeks, than
   Solomon, the pigeon family is a
   ramifying one, a
   banyan of banyans; to begin
with, bluish slate,
   but with ability. Modesty cannot dull
   the lustre of the pigeon
   swift and sure, coming quickest and
straightest just after a storm. The great
   lame war hero Cher Ami, the
   Lost Battalion’s gallant bird; and
   Mocker with one eye
      destroyed, delivering his dispatch
   to his superiors; and Sergeant Dunn,
   civilian pigeon who flew eight
   hundred sixty-eight miles
   in four days and six hours;
      and destined to hatch
   in France, Spike, veteran of
   the division in which Mocker
      served—exceptional messenger.
   "Rarely was confidence misplaced" a newspaper
   says. Dastardly comment
      inexactly phrased, as used of Her-
   mes, Ariel, or Leander—
   pigeons of the past. Neither was confidence
   misplaced in the Javan-
   Sumatran birds the Dutch had had
brought from Baghdad.
   Mysterious animal with a magnetic
   feel by which he traces backward
   his transportation outward,
even in a fog at sea, though glad
   to be tossed near enough the loft
   or coop to get back the same day.
   "Home on time without
      his message." What matter since he has
   got back. Migrating always in the same
   direction, bringing all letters
   to the same address, see-
   ing better homes than his,
      he is not Theudas
   boasting himself to be some-
   body, this anonymous post-
      man who, as soon as he could fly,
   was carrying valentines and messages of
   state; or soberer news—
      "So please write me and believe that I
   am yours very truly"; fine words
   those. An instrument not just an instinctive
   individual, this
   dove, that lifts his right foot over
the alighting-
   board to rejoin his ungainly pin-clad dark-skinned
   brood as domestic turtle-
   doves might; two. Invariably
two. The turtle, a not exciting
   bird—in Britain shy, detected
   by its constantly heard coo, with-
   out a song but not
      without a voice—does well to stay far
   out of sight; but the Pelew pigeon with
   black head, metallic wasp-lustred
   grass-green breast and purple
   legs and feet, need not; nor
      need the Nicobar,
   novel, narrow-feathered dove.
   And one should see the Papuan
      fancrests with six-sided scale which
   coats the foot; "not much is known about these splendid
   birds" hid in unimag-
      inably weak lead-colored ostrich-
   plumes a third of an inch long, and
   needle-fine cat-whisker-fibered battleship-
   gray lace. The Samoan
   tooth-billed pigeon fortunately
survives also—
   saved from destruction by no longer feeding on
   the ground, a bird with short legs
   and heavy bill, remarkable
because related to the dodo.
   Didus ineptus; man’s remorse
   enshrines it now, abundant still
   in sixteen-one. "A
      little bigger than our swans, these birds
   want wings and lay but one egg" the traveler
   said—"defenceless unsuspicious
   things, with a cry like the
   cry of a Gosling." Il
      dóudo (the words
   mean simple one)—extinct as
   the Solitaires which having "raised
      their young one do not disunite."
   A new pigeon cannot compensate, but we have
   it. With neat-cered eye, long
      face, trim form and posture, this delight-
   ful bird outdoes the dashingly
   black and white Dalmatian dog and map-freckled
   pony that Indians dress
   with feathers seriatim down
the mane and tail;—
   a slender Cinderella deliberately
   pied, so she on each side is
   the same, an all-feather piebald,
cuckoo-marked on a titanic scale
   taking perhaps sixteen birds to
   show the whole design, as in chess
   played with men and hors-
      es. Yes, the thus medievally
   two-colored sea-pie-patterned semi-swan-
   necked magpie-pigeon, gamecock-legged
   with long-clawed toes, and all
   extremes—head neck back tail
      and feet—coal black, the
   rest snow white, has a surpris-
   ing modernness and fanciness
      and stateliness and…. Yes indeed;
   developed by and humbly dedicated to
   the Gentlemen of the
      Feather Club, this is a dainty breed.




See in the Midst of Fair Leaves

and much fruit, the swan—
   one line of the mathematician’s
sign greater-than, drawn
   to an apex where the lake is
met by the weight on it; or an angel
standing in the sun, how well
   armed, how manly;

and promenading
   in sloughs of despond, a monster—
man when human nothing
   more, grown to immaturity,
punishing debtors, seeking his due—as
an arrow turned inward has
   no chance of peace.




Walking-Sticks and Paperweights and Watermarks

Walking among scepter-headed
weeds and daisies swayed by wind, they said,
   "Don’t scatter your
stick, on account of the souls." Led
from sun-spotted
   paths, we went "where leafy trees meet
   overhead and noise of traffic is unknown"—
the mind exhilarated
   by life all round, so stirringly

alive. The root-handled cudgel
with the bark left on, the woodbine smell-
   ing of the rain,
the very stones, have life. Little
scars on church-bell
   tongues put there by the Devil’s claws—
   authentic phantoms, ghosts, and witches, transformed
into an invisible
   fabric of inconsistency

motheaten by self-subtractives—
now as outright murderers and thieves,
   thrive openly.
An epigraph before it leaves
the wax, receives
   to give, and giving must itself
   receive, "difficulty is ordained to check
poltroons," and courage achieves
   despaired of ends. Oppositely

jointed against indecision,
the three legs of the triskelion
   meeting in the
middle between triangles, run
in unison
   without assistance. Yet, trudging
   on two legs that move contradictorily,
irked by ghosts and witches, one
   does not fear to ask for beauty

that is power devoid of fear.
A bold outspoken gentleman, cheer-
   ful, plodding, to-
the-point, used to the atmosphere
of work—who here
   appropriate to the thought of
   permanence, says, "this is my taste, it might not
be another man’s"—makes clear
   that stark sincere unflattery,

sine cera, is both farthest
from self-defensiveness and nearest;
   as when a seal
without haste, slowly is impressed
and forms a nest
   on which the raised device reversed,
   shows round. It must have been an able workman,
studious and self-possessed,
   a liker of solidity,

who gave a greenish Waterford
glass fool’s cap with summit curled down toward
   itself as the
glass grew, the look of tempered swordsteel,
and three-ore-d
   fishscale-burnished antimony-
   tin-and-lead’s smoky water-drop type-metal
smoothness emery-armored
   against rust. Its subdued glossy

splendor leaps out at the eye as
form dramatizes thought, in the glass
   witchball and air-
twist cane. This paperweight, in mass
a stone, surpass-
   ing it in tint, enlarges the
   fine chain-lines in the waterleaf weighted by
its hardened raindrop surface.
   The paper-mould’s similarly

once unsolid waspnest-blue, snow-
white, or seashell-gray rags, seen through, show
   sheepcotes, turkey-
mills, acorns, and anvils. "Stones grow,"
then stop, and so
   do gardens. "Plants grow and live; men
   grow and live and think." Utilizey la poste
aerienne, trade will follow
   the telephone. The post’s jerky

cancellings ink the stamp, relet-
tering stiltedly, as a puppet-
   acrobat walks
about with high steps on his net,
an alphabet
   of words and animals where the
   wire-embedded watermark’s more integral
expressiveness had first set
   its alabaster effigy.

In bark silverer than the swan,
esparto grass, or so-called Titan
   parchment tougher
than Hercules’ lion-skin—Spanish,
Umbrian,
   eastern, open, and jeweled crowns,
   corroborate the dolphin, crane, and ox; sealed
with wax by a pelican
   studying affectionately

a nest’s three-in-one cartwheel tri-
legged face. "For those we love, live and die"
   the motto says.
And we do. Part pelican, I,
doubting the high-
   way’s wide giant trivia where
   three roads meet in artificial openness,
am obliged to justify
   outspoken cordiality.

Firm-feathered juniper springing
from difficult ground, the sky trembling
   with power, the rain
falling upon the bird singing,
modest printing,
   on honest paper properly
   trimmed, are gifts addressed to memory, and a
gift is permanent, shining
   like the juniper’s trinity

of spines. An unburdensomely
worthy officer of charity,
   the evergreen
with awlshaped leaves in whorls of three—
successively
   firm. "On the first day of Christmas
   my true love he sent unto me, part of a
bough of a juniper-tree,"
   javelin-ed consecutively.




Virginia Britannia

Pale sand edges England’s old
dominion. The air is soft, warm, hot,
   above the cedar-dotted emerald shore
known to the redbird,
      the redcoated musketeer,
      the trumpet-flower, the cavalier,
the parson, and the
      wild parishioner. A deer-
   track in a church-floor
brick and Sir George Yeardley’s
coffin-tacks and tomb remain.
The now tremendous vine-en-
compassed hackberry
         starred with the ivy-flower,
         shades the church tower.
And "a great sinner lyeth here" under
   the sycamore.

A fritillary zigzags
toward the seemly resting-place of this
   unusual man and pleasing sinner who
"waits for a joyful
      resurrection." We-re-wo-
      comoco’s fur crown could be no
odder than we were
      with ostrich, Latin motto,
   and small gold horse-shoe,
as arms for an able
sting-ray-hampered pioneer,
painted as a Turk it seems,
the incessantly
         exciting Captain Smith
         who patient with
his inferiors, was a pugnacious
   equal; and to

Powhatan obliged, but not
a flatterer. Rare Indian, crowned by
   Christopher Newport! The Old Dominion has
all-green grass-hoppers
      in all-green, box-sculptured grounds;
      an almost English green surrounds
them. Care has formed a-
      mong unEnglish insect sounds,
   the white wall-rose. As
thick as Daniel Boone’s grape-
vine, the stem has wide-spaced great
blunt alternating ostrich-
skin warts that were thorns.
         Care has formed walls of yew
         since Indians knew
the Fort Old Field and narrow neck of land
   that Jamestown was.

Observe the terse Virginian,
the mettlesome gray one that drives the
   owl from tree to tree and imitates the call
of whippoorwill or
      lark or katydid—the leadgray
      lead-legged mocking-bird with head
held half away, and
      meditative eye as dead
   as sculptured marble
eye, alighting noiseless,
muses in the semi-sun,
standing on tall thin legs as
if he did not see,
         conspicuous, alone,
         on the round stonetopped
table with lead cupids grouped to form
   the pedestal.

Narrow herring-bonelaid bricks,
a dusty pink beside the dwarf box-
   bordered pansies, share the ivy-arbor shade
with cemetery
      lace settees, one at each side,
      and with the bird: box-bordered tide-
water gigantic
      jet black pansies (splendor; pride;)
   not for a decade
dressed, but for a day, in
overpowering velvet; and
gray blue-Andalusian
cock-feather pale ones
         ink-lined on the edge, fur-
         eyed, with ochre
on the cheek. The slowmoving glossy, tall
   quick cavalcade

of buckeye-brown surprising
jumpers, the contrasting work-mule and
   show-mule \& witch-cross door \& "strong sweet prison"
are part of what
      has come about, in the Black
      idiom, from advancing backward
in a circle;
      from taking The Potomac
   cowbirdlike; and on
The Chickahominy
establishing the Negro, opportunely brought, to strength-
en protest against
         tyranny. Rare unscent-
         ed, providently
hot, too sweet, inconsistent flowerbed!
   Old Dominion

earth makes sunflower-heads grow large;
hibiscus and so-called mimosa
   close at night; the scarlet peculiarly-quilled
pomegranate-petals,
      the African violet,
      and camellia, perfumeless. Yet
house-high glistening green
      magnolia-trees with velvet-
   textured flower, are filled
with anaesthetic scent
enough to make one die; as
the gardenia is, though its
two-toned green-furled buds
         and dark leaf-vein on green-
         er leaf when seen
against the light attract no pigmy bees
   such as the frilled

silk substanceless faint flower of
the crape-myrtle does. Odd Pamunkey
   princess, birdclaw-earringed; with a pet raccoon
from The Mattapo-
      ni (what a bear!) Feminine
      odd Indian young lady! Odd thin-
gauze-and-taffeta-
      dressed English one! Terrapin
   meat and crested spoon
feed the mistress of French
plum-and-turquoise-piped chaise-longue;
of brass-knobbed slat front-door and
everywhere open
         shaded house on Indian-
         named Virginian
streams, in counties named for English lords. The
   rattlesnake soon

said from our once dashingly
undiffident first flag, "don’t tread on
   me," tactless symbol of a new republic.
Priorities were
      cradled in this region not
      noted for humility; spot
that has high-singing
      frogs, cotton-mouth snakes and cot-
   ton-fields; clay for brick,
Lawrence jugs with Persian
loping wolf design; and hounds.
Here the poor unpoisonous
terrapin likes to
         idle near the sea-top;
         tobacco-crop
gains have church tablets; Devil’s woodyard swamps
   and one-brick-thick-

wall serpentine shadows star-
tle strangers. The strangler fig, the dwarf-
   fancying Egyptian, the American,
the Dutch, the noble
      Roman, in taking what they
      pleased—colonizing as we say—
were not all intel-
      lect and delicacy. A
   black savage or such
as was subject to the
deer-fur Crown is not all brawn
and animality. The
limestone tea-table,
         the mandolin-shaped big
         and little fig,
and the now disused silkworm-trees, imply
   amity; much

kind tyranny made ha-has
that kept back cows; clock-strengthened stocking
   and drooping cotton dress with handmade edge, mark
tyrant taste; the song-
      bird wakes too soon, to enjoy
      excellent idleness, destroy-
ing legitimate
      laziness, this unbought toy
   even in the dark
risking loud whee whee whee
of joy, the caraway-seed-
spotted sparrow perched in the
dew-drenched juniper
         beside the window-ledge;
         the little hedgesparrow
that wakes up seven minutes soon-
   er than the lark

they say. The live oak’s rounded
mass of undulating boughs, the white
   pine, the agèd hackberry—handsomest vis-
itor of all—the
      cedar’s etched solidity,
      the cypress, lose identity
and are one tree, as
      sunset flames increasingly
   against their leaf-chis-
elled blackening ridge of green;
and the redundantly wind-
widened clouds expanding to
earth size above the
         town’s bothered with wages
         childish sages,
are to the child an intimation of
   what glory is.




Bird-Witted

With innocent wide penguin eyes, three
   grown fledgling mocking-birds below
the pussy-willow tree,
   stand in a row,
wings touching, feebly solemn,
   till they see
      their no longer larger
      mother bringing
something which will partially
feed one of them.
   Towards the high-keyed intermittent squeak
      of broken carriage-springs, made by
   the three similar, meek-
      coated bird’s-eye
freckled forms she comes; and when
   from the beak
         of one, the still living
         beetle has dropped
out, she picks it up and puts
it in again.
   Standing in the shade till they have dressed
      their thickly-filamented, pale
   pussy-willow-surfaced
      coats, they spread tail
and wings, showing one by one,
   the modest
         white stripe lengthwise on the
         tail and crosswise
on the under wing, and the
accordion
is closed again. What delightful note
   with rapid unexpected flute-
sounds leaping from the throat
   of the astute
grown bird comes back to one from
the remote
         unenergetic sun-
         lit air before
the brood was here? Why has the
bird’s voice become
   harsh? A piebald cat observing them,
      is slowly creeping toward the trim
   trio on the tree-stem.
      Unused to him
the three make room—uneasy
   new problem.
      A dangling foot that missed
      its grasp, is raised
and finds the twig on which it
planned to perch. The
   parent darting down, nerved by what chills
      the blood, and by hope rewarded—
   of toil—since nothing fills
      squeaking unfed
mouths, wages deadly combat,
   and half kills
      with bayonet beak and
      cruel wings, the
intellectual, cautious-
l y c r e e p i n g c a t.




Half Deity

half worm. We all, infant and adult, have
   stopped to watch the butterfly—last of the
   elves—and learned to spare the wingless worm
      that hopefully ascends the tree. The well-known
   silk tiger swallowtail
      of South America, with body lightly
furred was that bearing pigments which engrave
the lower wings with dragon’s blood, weightless.
   They that have wings must not have weights. This more
   peninsula-tailed one with a black
      pitchfork-scallop edge on sunburnt zebra-skin,
   tired by the trip it made
      with drover-like tenacity, has been
sleeping upright on the elm. Its yellowness,
that of the autumn poplar-leaf, by day
   has been observed. Disguised in butterfly-
   bush Wedgwood-blue, Psyche follows it
      to that small tree, Micromalus, the midget
   crab; to the mimosa;
      and from that, to the flowering pomegranate.
Baffled not by the quick-clouding serene gray
moon but forced by the hot hot sun to pant,
   she stands on rug-soft grass; though "it is not
   permitted to gaze informally
      on majesty in such a manner as might
   well happen here." The blind
      all-seeing butterfly, fearing the slight
finger, wanders, as though it were ignorant,
across the path and lights on Zephyr’s palm,
   planting forefeet soberly; then pawing
   like a horse, turns round—apostrophe-
      tipped brown antennae: porcupining out as
   it arranges nervous
      wings. Vexed because curiosity has
been pursuing it, it cannot now be calm.
The butterfly’s round unglazed china eyes,
   pale tobacco brown, with the large eyes of
   the Nymph on them—gray eyes that now are
      black, for she with controlled agitated glance
   observes the insect’s face
      and all’s a-quiver with significance—
enact the scene of cats’ eyes on the magpie’s
eyes, by Goya. Butterflies do not need
   home advice. As though Zephyr and Psyche
   were patent-leather cricket singing
      loud, and gnat-catching garden-toad, the swallow-
   tail bewitched and danger-
      ous, springs away, zebra half-deified,
trampling the air as it tramples the flowers, feed-
ing where it pivots. Twig-veined irascible
   fastidious stubborn undisciplined
   zebra! Sometimes one is grateful to
      a stranger for looking very nice. But free
   to leave the outspread hand
      it flies, drunken with triviality
or guided by visions of strength, off until,
diminishing like wreckage on the sea,
   rising and falling easily, it mounts
   the swell and keeping its true course with
      what swift majesty, indifferent to
   us, is gone. Deaf to ap-
      proval—magnet-nice, as it flutters through
airs now slack, now fresh. It has strict ears when the
West Wind speaks. It was he, with mirror eyes
   of strong anxiety, who had no net
   or flowering shrewd-scented tropical
      device, or lignum vitae perch in half-shut
   hand; for ours is not a
      canely land; nor was it Oberon, but
this quiet young man with piano replies,
named Zephyr, whose hand spread out was enough
   to tempt the fiery tiger-horse to stand,
   eyes staring skyward and chest arching
      bravely out—historic metamorphoser
   and saintly animal
      in India, in Egypt, anywhere.
His talk was as strange as my grandmother’s muff.




Smooth Gnarled Crape Myrtle

   A brass-green bird with grass-
green throat smooth as a nut, springs from
   twig to twig askew, copying the
Chinese flower piece—businesslike atom
   in the stiff-leafed tree’s blue-
   pink, dregs-of-wine, pyramids
   of mathematic
   circularity—one of a
   pair. A redbird with a hatchet
   crest lights straight, on a twig
   between the two, bending the
      peculiar
      bouquet down; and there are

   several black antique
bootjack fireflies touched with weak bright
   hunting-pink. "The legendary white-
eared black bulbul that sings
   only in pure Sanskrit" should
   be here—"tame clever
   true nightingale." The cardinal-
   bird that is usually a
   pair looks somewhat odd, like
   "the ambassadorial
      Inverness
      worn by one who dresses

   in New York but dreams of
London." It was artifice saw
   on a patch-box pigeon-egg, room for
fervent script, and wrote as with a bird’s claw
   under the pair on the
   hyacinth-blue lid—"joined in
   friendship, crowned by love."
   An aspect may deceive; as the
   elephant’s columbine-tubed trunk
   held waveringly out—
   an at will heavy thing—is
      delicate.
      Art is unfortunate.

   One may be a blameless
bachelor and it is but a
   step to Congreve. A Rosalindless
redbird comes where people are, knowing they
   have not made a point of
   being where he is—this bird
   which says not sings, "without
   loneliness I should be more
   lonely, so I keep it"—half in
   Japanese. And what of
   our clasped hands that swear "By Peace
      Plenty; as
      by Wisdom Peace." Alas!




The Pangolin

Another armored animal—scale
      lapping scale with spruce-cone regu-
      larity until they
form the uninterrupted central
      tail-row. This near artichoke
         with head and legs and grit-equipped giz-
      zard, the night miniature artist-
         engineer, is    Leonardo’s
            indubitable son? Im-
      pressive animal
   and toiler, of whom we seldom hear.
            Armor seems extra. But for him,
   the closing ear-
      ridge—or bare
      ear, lacking even this small
      eminence—and similarly safe

contracting nose and eye apertures
      impenetrably closable,
      are not;—a true ant-eat-
er, not cockroach-eater, who endures
      exhausting solitary
         trips through unfamiliar ground at night,
      returning before sunrise; stepping
         in the moonlight,    on the moonlight
            peculiarly, that the out-
      side edges of his
   hands may bear the weight and save the claws
            for digging. Serpentined about
   the tree, he draws
      away from
      danger unpugnaciously,
      with no sound but a harmless hiss; keep-

ing the fragile grace of the Thomas-
      of-Leighton-Buzzard Westminster
      Abbey wrought-iron vine, or
rolls himself into a ball that has
      power to defy all effort
         to unroll it;—strongly intailed, neat
      head for core, on neck not breaking off,
         with curled-in feet. Nevertheless
            he has sting-proof scales; and nest
      of rocks closed with earth
   from inside, which he can thus darken.
            Sun and moon \& day and night \& man and beast
   each with a splen-
      dor which man
      in all his vileness cannot
      set aside; each with an excellence!

"Fearful yet to be feared," the armored
      ant-eater met by the driver
      ant does not turn back, but
engulfs what he can, the flattened sword-
      edged leafpoints on the tail and
         artichoke-set leg and body plates
      quivering violently when it
         retaliates    and swarms on him.
            Compact like the furled fringed frill
      on the hat-brim of
   Gargallo’s hollow iron head of a
            matador, he will drop and will
   then walk away
      unhurt, al-
      though if unintruded on
      he will come slowly down the tree, helped

by his tail. The giant-pangolin
      tail, graceful tool, as prop or hand
      or broom or axe, tipped like
the elephant’s trunk with special skin,
      is not lost on this ant and
         stone swallowing uninjurable
      artichoke, which simpletons thought a
         living fable    whom the stones had
            nourished whereas ants had done
      so. Pangolins are
   not aggressive animals; between
            dusk and day, they have the not un-
   chainlike, machine-
      like form and
      frictionless creep of a thing
      made graceful by adversities, con-

versities. To explain grace requires
      a curious hand. If that which
      is at all were not for
ever, why would those who graced the spires
      with animals and gathered
         there to rest, on cold luxurious
      low stone seats—a monk and monk and monk—
         between the thus ingenious roof-
            supports, have slaved to confuse
      grace with a kindly
   manner, time in which to pay a debt,
            the cure for sins, a graceful use
   of what are yet
      approved stone
      mullions branching out across
      the perpendiculars? A sailboat

was the first machine. The manis, made
      for moving quietly also,
      is neither a prisoner
nor a god; on hind feet plantigrade,
      with certain postures of a
         man. Beneath sun and moon, man slaving
      to make his life more sweet, leaves half the
         flowers worth having,    needing to choose
            wisely how to use the strength;—
      a paper-maker
   like the wasp; a tractor of food-stuffs,
            like the ant; spidering a length
   of web from bluffs
      above a
      stream; in fighting, mechanicked
      like the pangolin; capsizing in

disheartenment. Bedizened or stark
      naked, man, the self, the being
      so-called human, writingmaster
to this world, griffons a dark
      "Like does not like like that is
         obnoxious"; and writes errror with four
      r’s. Among animals, one has a
         sense of humor    then, which saves a
            few steps, which saves years—unig-
      norant, modest and
   unemotional, and all emo-
            tion; one with everlasting vig-
   or, power to grow
      though there are
      few of him—who can make one
      breathe faster, and make one erecter.

Not afraid of anything is he
      and then goes cowering forth, tread paced
      to meet an obstacle
at every step. Consistent with the
      formula—warm blood, no gills,
         two pairs of hands and a few hairs—that
      is a mammal; there he sits in his
         own habitat,    serge-clad, strong-shod.
            The prey of fear; he, always
      curtailed, extinguished,
   thwarted by the dusk, work partly done,
            says to the alternating blaze,
   "Again the sun!
      anew each
      day; and new and new and new,
      that comes into and steadies my soul.




Rigorists

"We saw reindeer
browsing," a friend who’d been in Lapland, said:
"finding their own food; they are adapted

   to scant reino
or pasture, yet they can run eleven
miles in fifty minutes; the feet spread when

   the snow is soft,
and act as snow-shoes. They are rigorists
however handsomely cutwork artists

   of Lapland and
Siberia elaborate the trace
or saddle-girth with saw-tooth leather lace.

   One looked at us
with its firm face part brown, part white,—a queen
of alpine flowers. Santa Claus’ reindeer, seen

   at last, had gray-
brown fur, with a neck like edelweiss or
lion’s foot,—leontopodium more

   exactly." And
this candelabrum-headed ornament
for a place where ornaments are scarce, sent

   to Alaska,
was a gift preventing the extinction
of the Esquimo. The battle was won

   by a quiet man,
Sheldon Jackson, evangel to that race
whose reprieve he read in the reindeer’s face.




Four Quartz Crystal Clocks

There are four vibrators, the world’s exactest clocks;
   and these quartz time-pieces that tell
time intervals to other clocks,
   these worksless clocks work well;
and all four, independently the
   same, are there in the cool Bell
      Laboratory time

vault. Checked by a comparator with Arlington,
   they punctualize the "radio,
cinéma," and "presse,"—a group the
   Giraudoux truth-bureau
of hoped-for accuracy has termed
   "instruments of truth." We know—
      as Jean Giraudoux says

certain Arabs have not heard—that Napoleon
   is dead; that a quartz prism when
the temperature changes, feels
   the change and that the then
electrified alternate edges
   oppositely charged, threaten
      careful timing; so that

this water-clear crystal as the Greeks used to say,
   this "clear ice" must be kept at the
same coolness. Repetition, with
   the scientist, should be
synonymous with accuracy.
   The lemur-student can see
      that an aye-aye is not

an angwan-tíbo, potto, or loris. The sea-
   side burden should not embarrass
the bell-boy with the buoy-ball
   endeavoring to pass
hotel patronesses; nor could a
   practiced ear confuse the glass
      eyes for taxidermists

with eye-glasses from the optometrist. And as
   MEridian-7 1, 2
1, 2 gives, each fifteenth second
   in the same voice, the new
data—"The time will be" so and so—
   you realize that "when you
      hear the signal," you’ll be

hearing Jupiter or jour pater, the day god—
   the salvaged son of Father Time—
telling the cannibal Chronos
   (eater of his proxime
newborn progeny) that punctuality
   is not a crime.




The Paper Nautilus

   For authorities whose hopes
are shaped by mercenaries?
   Writers entrapped by
   teatime fame and by
commuters’ comforts? Not for these
   the paper nautilus
   constructs her thin glass shell.

   Giving her perishable
souvenir of hope, a dull
   white outside and smooth-
   edged inner surface
glossy as the sea, the watchful
   maker of it guards it
   day and night; she scarcely

   eats until the eggs are hatched.
Buried eight-fold in her eight
   arms, for she is in
   a sense a devil-
fish, her glass ramshorn-cradled freight
   is hid but is not crushed.
   As Hercules, bitten

   by a crab loyal to the hydra,
was hindered to succeed,
   the intensively
   watched eggs coming from
the shell free it when they are freed,—
   leaving its wasp-nest flaws
   of white on white, and close-

   laid Ionic chiton-folds
like the lines in the mane of
   a Parthenon horse,
   round which the arms had
wound themselves as if they knew love
   is the only fortress
   strong enough to trust to.




Nevertheless

you’ve seen a strawberry
   that’s had a struggle; yet
   was, where the fragments met,

a hedgehog or a starfish
   for the multitude
   of seeds. What better food

than apple-seeds—the fruit
   within the fruit—locked in
   like counter-curved twin

hazel-nuts? Frost that kills
   the little rubber-plant-
   leaves of kok-saghyz-stalks, can’t

harm the roots; they still grow
   in frozen ground. Once where
   there was a prickly-pear-

leaf clinging to barbed wire,
   a root shot down to grow
   in earth two feet below;

as carrots form mandrakes
   or a ram’s-horn root some-
   times. Victory won’t come

to me unless I go
   to it; a grape-tendril
   ties a knot in knots till

knotted thirty times,—so
   the bound twig that’s under-
   gone and over-gone, can’t stir.

The weak overcomes its
   menace, the strong over-
   comes itself. What is there

like fortitude! What sap
   went through that little thread
   to make the cherry red!




The Wood-Weasel

emerges daintily, the skunk—
don’t laugh—in sylvan black and white chipmunk
regalia. The inky thing
adaptively whited with glistening
goat-fur, is wood-warden. In his
ermined well-cuttlefish-inked wool, he is
determination’s totem. Outlawed?
His sweet face and powerful feet go about
in chieftain’s coat of Chilcat cloth.
He is his own protection from the moth,

noble little warrior. That
otter-skin on it, the living pole-cat,
smothers anything that stings. Well,—
this same weasel’s playful and his weasel
associates are too. Only
WOOD-weasels shall associate with me.




Elephants


Uplifted and waved until immobilized
wistarialike, the opposing opposed
mouse-gray twined proboscises’ trunk formed by two
trunks, fights itself to a spiraled inter-nosed

deadlock of dyke-enforced massiveness. It’s a
knock-down drag-out fight that asks no quarter? Just
a pastime, as when the trunk rains on itself
the pool it siphoned up; or when—since each must

provide his forty-pound bough dinner—he broke
the leafy branches. These templars of the Tooth,
these matched intensities, take master care of
master tools. One, sleeping with the calm of youth,

at full length in the half dry sun-flecked stream-bed,
rests his hunting-horn-curled trunk on shallowed stone.
The sloping hollow of the sleeper’s body
cradles the gently breathing eminence’s prone

mahout, asleep like a lifeless six-foot
frog, so feather light the elephant’s stiff
ear’s unconscious of the crossed feet’s weight. And the
defenseless human thing sleeps as sound as if

incised with hard wrinkles, embossed with wide ears,
invincibly tusked, made safe by magic hairs!
As if, as if, it is all ifs; we are at
much unease. But magic’s masterpiece is theirs,—

Houdini’s serenity quelling his fears.
Elephant ear-witnesses-to-be of hymns
and glorias, these ministrants all gray or
gray with white on legs or trunk, are a pilgrims’

pattern of revery not reverence,—a
religious procession without any priests,
the centuries-old carefullest unrehearsed
play. Blessed by Buddha’s Tooth, the obedient beasts

themselves as toothed temples blessing the street, see
the white elephant carry the cushion that
carries the casket that carries the Tooth.
Amenable to what, matched with him, are gnat

trustees, he does not step on them as the white-
canopied blue-cushioned Tooth is augustly
and slowly returned to the shrine. Though white is
the color of worship and of mourning, he

is not here to worship and he is too wise
to mourn,—a life-prisoner but reconciled.
With trunk tucked up compactly—the elephant’s
sign of defeat—he resisted, but is the child

of reason now. His straight trunk seems to say: when
what we hoped for came to nothing, we revived.
As loss could not ever alter Socrates’
tranquillity, the elephant has contrived

equanimity. With the Socrates of
animals as with Sophocles the Bee, on whose
tombstone a hive was incised, sweetness tinctures
his gravity. His held up fore-leg for use

as a stair, to be climbed or descended with
the aid of his ear, expounds the brotherhood
of creatures to man the encroacher by the
small word with the dot, meaning know,—the verb bd.

These knowers, these distinct rememberers
like Bu˙ d, of what they have experienced, are
"unable to pierce by one dart from the bow
four plaintain-leaves laid at the points of a square";

and cannot, like Buddha, change missiles to wreaths,
alter their shape, bisect hairs in the dark, make
their wisdom apparent in rays of all hues,
or turn heat, exasperated, to earthquake-

fire. Yet they "arouse the feeling that they are
allied to man" and can change roles with their trustees.
Hardship makes the soldier; then teachableness
makes him the philosopher—as Socrates,

prudently testing the suspicious thing, knew
the wisest is he who’s not sure that he knows.
Who rides on a tiger can never dismount;
asleep on an elephant, that is repose.




The Mind is an Enchanting Thing

is an enchanted thing
      like the glaze on a
katydid-wing
         subdivided by sun
         till the nettings are legion.
Like Gieseking playing Scarlatti;

like the apteryx-awl
      as a beak, or the
kiwi’s rain-shawl
         of haired feathers, the mind
         feeling its way as though blind,
walks along with its eyes on the ground.

It has memory’s ear
      that can hear without
having to hear.
         Like the gyroscope’s fall,
         truly unequivocal
because trued by regnant certainty,

it is a power of
      strong enchantment. It
is like the dove-
         neck animated by
sun; it is memory’s eye;
         it’s conscientious inconsistency.

It tears off the veil; tears
      the temptation, the
mist the heart wears,
         from its eyes,—if the heart
         has a face; it takes apart
dejection. It’s fire in the dove-neck’s

iridescence; in the
      inconsistencies
of Scarlatti.
         Unconfusion submits
         its confusion to proof; it’s
not a Herod’s oath that cannot change.




Keeping Their World Large

   All too literally, their flesh
   and their spirit are our shield
      New York Times, 7th June, 1944

   I should like to see that country’s tiles, bedrooms,
stone patios
      and ancient wells: Rinaldo
Caramonica’s the cobbler’s, Frank Sblendorio’s
      and Dominick Angelastro’s country—
      the grocer’s, the iceman’s, the dancer’s—the
   beautiful Miss Damiano’s; wisdom’s

   and all angels’ Italy, this Christmas Day
this Christmas year.
      A noiseless piano, an
innocent war, the heart that can act against itself. Here,
      each unlike and all alike, could
      so many—stumbling, falling, multiplied
   till bodies lay as ground to walk on—say

   "If Christ and the apostles died in vain, I’ll
die in vain with them"?
      When the very heart was a prayer
against this way of victory. Stem after stem
      of what we call the tree—set, row
      on row; that forest of white crosses; the
   vision makes us faint. My eyes won’t close to it. While

   the knife was lifted, Isaac the offering
lay mute.
      These, laid like animals for sacrifice,
like Isaac on the mount, were their own substitute.
      And must they all be harmed by those
      whom they have saved. Tears that don’t fall are what
   they wanted. Belief in belief marching

   marching marching—all alone, all similar,
spurning pathos,
      clothed in fear—marching to death
marching to life; it was like the cross, is like the cross.
      Keeping their world large, that silent
      marching marching marching and this silence
   for which there is no description, are

   the voices of fighters with no rests between,
who would not yield;
      whose spirits and whose bodies
all too literally were our shield, are still our shield.
      They fought the enemy, we fight
      fat living and self-pity. Shine, O shine
   unfalsifying sun, on this sick scene.




His Shield

The pin-swin or spine-swine
      (the edgehog miscalled hedgehog) with all his edges out,
   echidna and echinoderm in distressed-
pin-cushion thorn-fur coats, the spiny pig or porcupine,
      the rhino with horned snout—
   everything is battle-dressed.

Pig-fur won’t do, I’ll wrap
      myself in salamander-skin like Presbyter John.
   A lizard in the midst of flames, a firebrand
that is life, asbestos-eyed asbestos-eared, with tattooed nap
      and permanent pig on
   the instep; he can withstand

fire and won’t drown. In his
      unconquerable country of unpompous gusto,
   gold was so common none considered it; greed
and flattery were unknown. Though rubies large as tennis-
      balls conjoined in streams so
   that the mountain seemed to bleed,

the inextinguishable
      salamander styled himself but presbyter. His shield
   was his humility. In Carpasian
linen coat, flanked by his household lion-cubs and sable
      retinue, he revealed
   a formula safer than

an armorer’s: the power of relinquishing
      what one would keep; that is freedom. Become dinosaur-
   skulled, quilled or salamander-wooled, more ironshod
and javelin-dressed than a hedgehog battalion of steel, but be
      dull. Don’t be envied or
   armed with a measuring-rod.




Propriety

is some such word
   as the chord
      Brahms had heard
      from a bird,
sung down near the root of the throat;
it’s the little downy woodpecker
         spiraling up a tree—
         up up up like mercury;

   a not long
   sparrow-song
      of hayseed
      magnitude—
a tuned reticence with rigor
from strength at the source. Propriety is
         Bach’s Solfegietto—
         harmonica and basso.

   The fish-spine
   on firs, on
      somber trees
      by the sea’s
walls of wave-worn rock—have it; and
a moonbow and Bach’s cheerful firmness
         in a minor key.
         It’s an owl-and-a-pussy-

   both-content
   agreement.
      Come, come. It’s
      mixed with wits;
it’s not a graceful sadness. It’s
resistance with bent head, like foxtail
         millet’s. Brahms and Bach,
         no; Bach and Brahms. To thank Bach

   for his song
   first, is wrong.
      Pardon me;
      both are the
unintentional pansy-face
uncursed by self-inspection; blackened
         because born that way.




Voracities and Verities Sometimes are Interacting

I don’t like diamonds;
the emerald’s "grass-lamp glow" is better;
      and unobtrusiveness is dazzling,
         upon occasion.
      Some kinds of gratitude are trying.

   Poets, don’t make a fuss;
the elephant’s "crooked trumpet" "doth write";
      and to a tiger-book I am reading—
         I think you know the one—
      I am under obligation.

         One may be pardoned, yes I know
         one may, for love undying.




A Face

"I am not treacherous, callous, jealous, superstitious,
supercilious, venomous, or absolutely hideous":
   studying and studying its expression,
   exasperated desperation
      though at no real impasse,
      would gladly break the glass;

when love of order, ardor, uncircuitous simplicity,
with an expression of inquiry, are all one needs to be!
   Certain faces, a few, one or two—or one
   face photographed by recollection—
      to my mind, to my sight,
      must remain a delight.




By Disposition of Angels

Messengers much like ourselves? Explain it.
Steadfastness the darkness makes explicit?
Something heard most clearly when not near it?
      Above particularities,
These unparticularities praise cannot violate.
   One has seen, in such steadiness never deflected,
   How by darkness a star is perfected.

Star that does not ask me if I see it?
Fir that would not wish me to uproot it?
Speech that does not ask me if I hear it?
      Mysteries expound mysteries.
Steadier than steady, star dazzling me, live and elate,
   No need to say, how like some we have known; too like her,
   Too like him, and a-quiver forever.




The Icosasphere

"In Buckinghamshire hedgerows
   the birds nesting in the merged green density,
      weave little bits of string and moths and feathers and thistledown,
      in parabolic concentric curves"
   and, working for concavity, leave spherical feats of rare efficiency;
      whereas through lack of integration,

avid for someone’s fortune,
   three were slain and ten committed perjury,
      six died, two killed themselves, and two paid fines for risks they’d run.
      But then there is the icosasphere
   in which at last we have steel-cutting at its summit of economy,
      since twenty triangles conjoined, can wrap one

ball or double-rounded shell
   with almost no waste, so geometrically
      neat, it’s an icosahedron. Would the engineers making one,
      or Mr. J. O. Jackson tell us
   how the Egyptians could have set up seventy-eight-foot solid granite vertically?
      We should like to know how that was done.




Armor’s Undermining Modesty

   At first I thought a pest
   must have alighted on my wrist.
   It was a moth almost an owl,
   its wings were furred so well,
with backgammon-board wedges interlacing
on the wing—

   like cloth of gold in a pattern
   of scales with a hair-seal Persian
   sheen. Once, self-determination
   made an axe of a stone
and hacked things out with hairy paws. The consequence—our mis-set
alphabet.

   Arise, for it is day.
   Even gifted scholars lose their way
   through faulty etymology.
   No wonder we hate poetry,
and stars and harps and the new moon. If tributes cannot
be implicit,

   give me diatribes and the fragrance of iodine,
   the cork oak acorn grown in Spain;
   the pale-ale-eyed impersonal look
   which the sales-placard gives the bock beer buck.
What is more precise than precision? Illusion.
Knights we’ve known,

   like those familiar
   now unfamiliar knights who sought the Grail, were
   ducs in old Roman fashion
   without the addition
of wreaths and silver rods, and armor gilded
or inlaid.

   They did not let self bar
   their usefulness to others who were
   different. Though Mars is excessive
   is being preventive,
heroes need not write an ordinall of attributes to enumerate
what they hate.

   I should, I confess,
   like to have a talk with one of them about excess,
   and armor’s undermining modesty
   instead of innocent depravity.
A mirror-of-steel uninsistence should countenance
continence,

   objectified and not by chance,
   there in its frame of circumstance
   of innocence and altitude
   in an unhackneyed solitude.
There is the tarnish; and there, the imperishable wish.




Quoting An Also Private Thought

Some speak of things we know, as new;
   And you, of things unknown as things forgot.

A similar coral invades the apple, dyed
   Inside as by infusion of the rind,

Or the poem that chanced to be prose,
   Disclosing the signature in an interior

Mathematician’s parenthesis—
   Astute device quite different from the autograph.

Somehow the accident of pleasure—a dedication qualitied
   Indeed. It is at the opposite pole from the miser’s

Escutcheon, three vises hard-screwed;
   Three padlocks clodhopping upon sensibility

That devastating asset antipodal to pride,
   That would not for the world intrude




We Call Them the Brave

who likely were reluctant to be brave.
Sitting by a slow fire on a waste
of snow, I would last about an hour.
Better not euphemize the grave.

In this fashionable town, endearments are the mode
though generals are appraised—not praised—
and one is not forced to walk about
where a muddy slough serves as a road.

"What are these shadows barely
visible, which radar fails to scan?"
Ships "keeping distance on the gentle swell."
And "what is a free world ready

to do, for what it values most?"
Bestow little discs the bereaved may touch?
Can I ever forget it even when dead—
that congressionally honored ghost

mourned by a friend whose shoulder sags—
weeping on the shoulder of another
for another; with another sitting near,
filling out casualty-tags.

What of it? We call them the brave
perhaps? Yes; what if the time should come
when no one will fight for anything
and there’s nothing of worth to save.




Bulwarked against Fate

Affirmed. Pent by power that holds it fast—
a paradox. Pent. Hard pressed,
   you take the blame and are inviolate.
      Abased at last;
      not the tempest-tossed.
Compressed; firmed by the thrust of the blast
   till compact, like a bulwark against fate;
      lead-saluted,
      saluted by lead?
As though flying Old Glory full mast.




Apparition of Splendor

Partaking of the miraculous
   since never known literally,
Dürer’s rhinoceros
   might have startled us equally
   if black-and-white-spined elaborately.

Like another porcupine, or fern,
   the mouth in an arching egret
was too black to discern
   till exposed as a silhouette;
   but the double-embattled thistle of jet—

disadvantageous supposedly—
   has never shot a quill. Was it
some joyous fantasy,
   plain eider-eared exhibit
   of spines rooted in the sooty moss,

or "train supported by porcupines—
   a fairy’s eleven yards long"? …
as when the lightning shines
   on thistlefine spears, among
   prongs in lanes above lanes of a shorter prong,

"with the forest for nurse," also dark
   at the base—where needle-debris
springs and shows no footmark;
   the setting for a symmetry
   you must not touch unless you are a fairy.

Maine should be pleased that its animal
   is not a waverer, and rather
than fight, lets the primed quill fall.
   Shallow oppressor, intruder,
   insister, you have found a resister.




The Sycamore

      Against a gun-metal sky
   I saw an albino giraffe. Without
      leaves to modify,
chamois-white as
said, though partly pied near the base,
   it towered where a chain of
      stepping-stones lay in a stream nearby;
      glamour to stir the envy

      of anything in motley—
   Hampshire pig, the living lucky-stone; or
      all-white butterfly.
A commonplace:
there’s more than just one kind of grace.
   We don’t like flowers that do
      not wilt; they must die, and nine
      she-camel-hairs aid memory.




O to Be a Dragon


      If I, like Solomon, …
      could have my wish—

   my wish ... O to be a dragon,
a symbol of the power of Heaven—of silkworm
size or immense; at times invisible.




I May, I Might, I Must

If you will tell me why the fen
appears impassable, I then
will tell you why I think that I
can get across it if I try.




A Jellyfish

Visible, invisible,
   a fluctuating charm
an amber-tinctured amethyst
   inhabits it, your arm
approaches and it opens
   and it closes; you had meant
to catch it and it quivers;
   you abandon your intent.




Values in Use

I attended school and I liked the place—
grass and little locust-leaf shadows like lace.

Writing was discussed. They said, "We create
values in the process of living, daren’t await

their historic progress." Be abstract
and you’ll wish you’d been specific; it’s a fact.

What was I studying? Values in use,
"judged on their own ground." Am I still abstruse?

Walking along, a student said offhand,
"‘Relevant’ and ‘plausible’ were words I understand."

A pleasing statement, anonymous friend.
Certainly the means must not defeat the end.




No better than "a withered daffodil"

Ben Johnson said he was? "O I could still
Like melting snow upon some craggy hill,
   Drop, drop, drop, drop."

I too until I saw that French brocade
blaze green as though some lizard in the shade
   became exact—

set off by replicas of violet—
like Sidney, leaning in his striped jacket
   against a lime—

a work of art. And I too seemed to be
an insouciant rester by a tree—
   no daffodil.




The Arctic Ox (or Goat)

Derived from "Golden Fleece of the Arctic," by John J. Teal, Jr., who rears musk oxen on his farm in Vermont, as set forth in the March 1958 issue of the Atlantic Monthly.

To wear the arctic fox
you have to kill it. Wear
   qiviut—the underwool of the arctic ox—
pulled off it like a sweater;
your coat is warm; your conscience, better.

I would like a suit of
qiviut, so light I did not
   know I had it on; and in the
course of time, another
since I had not had to murder

the "goat" that grew the fleece
that made the first. The musk ox
   has no musk and it is not an ox—
illiterate epithet.
Bury your nose in one when wet.

It smells of water, nothing else,
and browses goatlike on
   hind legs. Its great distinction
is not egocentric scent
but that it is intelligent.

Chinchillas, otters, water rats,
and beavers keep us warm
   but think! a "musk ox" grows six pounds
of qiviut; the cashmere ram,
three ounces—that is all—of pashm.

Lying in an exposed spot,
basking in the blizzard,
   these ponderosos could dominate
the rare-hairs market in Kashan and yet
you could not have a choicer pet.

They join you as you work;
love jumping in and out of holes,
   play in water with the children,
learn fast, know their names,
will open gates and invent games.

While not incapable
of courtship, they may find its
   servitude and flutter, too much
like Procrustes’ bed;
so some decide to stay unwed.

Camels are snobbish
and sheep, unintelligent;
   water buffaloes, neurasthenic—
even murderous.
Reindeer seem over-serious,

whereas these scarce qivies,
with golden fleece and winning ways,
   outstripping every fur-bearer—
there in Vermont quiet—
could demand Bold Ruler’s diet:

Mountain Valley water,
dandelions, carrots, oats—
   encouraged as well—by bed
made fresh three times a day,
to roll and revel in the hay.

Insatiable for willow
leaves alone, our goatlike
   qivi-curvi-capricornus
sheds down ideal for a nest.
Song-birds find qiviut best.

Suppose you had a bag
of it; you could spin a pound
   into a twenty-four-or-five-
mile thread—one, forty-ply—
that will not shrink in any dye.

If you fear that you are
reading an advertisement,
   you are. If we can’t be cordial
to these creatures’ fleece,
I think that we deserve to freeze.




Saint Nicholas,

   might I, if you can find it, be given
a chameleon with tail
that curls like a watch spring; and vertical
on the body—including the face—pale
   tiger-stripes, about seven;
      (the melanin in the skin
      having been shaded from the sun by thin
         bars; the spinal dome
            beaded along the ridge
         as if it were platinum).

   If you can find no striped chameleon,
might I have a dress or suit—
I guess you have heard of it—of qiviut?
and to wear with it, a taslon shirt, the drip-dry fruit
   of research second to none;
      sewn, I hope, by Excello;
      as for buttons to keep down the collar-points, no.
         The shirt could be white—
            and be "worn before six,"
         either in daylight or at night.

   But don’t give me, if I can’t have the dress,
a trip to Greenland, or grim
trip to the moon. The moon should come here. Let him
make the trip down, spread on my dark floor some dim
   marvel, and if a success
      that I stoop to pick up and wear,
      I could ask nothing more. A thing yet more rare,
         though, and different,
            would be this: Hans von Marées’
         St. Hubert, kneeling with head bent,

   form erect—in velvet, tense with restraint—
hand hanging down: the horse, free.
Not the original, of course. Give me
a postcard of the scene—huntsman and divinity—
   hunt-mad Hubert startled into a saint
      by a stag with a Figure entined.
      But why tell you what you must have divined?
         Saint Nicholas, O Santa Claus,
            would it not be the most
         prized gift that ever was!




For February 14th

      Saint Valentine,
although late, would "some interested law
impelled to plod in the poem’s cause"
      be unwelcome with a line?

      Might you have liked a stone
from a De Beers Consolidated Mine?
or badger-neat saber-thronged thistle
      of Palestine—the leaves alone

      down’d underneath,
worth a touch? or that mimosa-leafed vine
called an "Alexander’s armillary
      sphere" fanning out in a wreath?

      Or did the ark
preserve paradise-birds with jet-black plumes,
whose descendants might serve as presents?
      But questioning is the mark

      of a pest! Why think
only of animals in connection
with the ark or the wine Noah drank?
      but that the ark did not sink.




Combat Cultural

One likes to see a laggard rook’s high
speed at sunset to outfly the dark,
   or a mount well schooled for a medal—
front legs tucked under for the barrier,
   or team of leapers turned aerial.

   I recall a documentary
of Cossacks: a visual fugue, a mist
   of swords that seemed to sever
heads from bodies—feet stepping as through
   harp-strings in a scherzo. However,

   the quadrille of Old Russia for me:
with aimlessly drooping handkerchief
   snapped like the crack of a whip;
a deliriously spun-out-level
   frock-coat skirt, unswirled and a-droop

   in remote promenade. Let me see …
Old Russia, did I say? Cold Russia
   this time: the prize bunnyhug
and platform-piece of experts in the
   trip-and-slug of wrestlers in a rug.

   "Sacked" and ready for bed apparently—
with a jab, a kick, pinned to the wall,
   they work toward the edge and stick;
stagger off, and one is victim of a
   flipflop—leg having circled leg as thick.

   Some art, because of high quality,
is unlikely to command high sales;
   yes, no doubt; but here, oh no;
not with the frozen North’s Nan-ai-ans
   of the sack in their tight touch-and-go.

   These battlers, dressed identically—
just one person—may, by seeming twins,
   point a moral, should I confess;
we must cement the parts of any
   objective symbolic of sagesse.




Blue Bug

Upon seeing Dr. Raworth Williams’ Blue Bug with seven other ponies, photographed by Thomas McAvoy: Sports Illustrated.

   In this camera shot,
from that fine print in which you hide
(eight-pony portrait from the side),
   you seem to recognize
   a recognizing eye,
      limber Bug.
Only partly said, perhaps, it has been implied
that you seem to be the one to ride.

I don’t know how you got your name
   and don’t like to inquire.
      Nothing more punitive than the pest
   who says, "I’m trespassing," and
does it just the same.
   I’ve guessed, I think.
      I like a face that seems a nest,

a "mere container for the eye"—
   triangle-cornered—and
      pitchfork-pronged ears stiffly parallel:
   bug brother to an Arthur
Mitchell dragonfly,
   speeding to left,
      speeding to right; reversible,

like "turns in an ancient Chinese
   melody, a thirteen
      twisted silk-string three-finger solo."
   There they are, Yellow Riverscroll
accuracies
   of your version
      of something similar—polo.

            Restating it:
            pelo, I turn,
         on polos, a pivot.

   If a little elaborate,
Redon (Odilon) brought it to mind,
      his thought of the eye,
of revolving—combined somehow with pastime—
      pastime that is work,
muscular docility,
      also mentality,

as in the acrobat Li Siau Than,
      gibbonlike but limberer,
   defying gravity,
      nether side arched up,
      cup on head not upset—
   China’s very most ingenious man.




Arthur Mitchell

Slim dragonfly
too rapid for the eye
   to cage—
contagious gem of virtuosity—
make visible, mentality.
Your jewels of mobility

   reveal
      and veil
         a peacock-tail




The mind, intractable thing

   even with its own ax to grind, sometimes
      helps others. Why can’t it help me?

            O imagnifico,
wizard in words—poet, was it, as
Alfredo Panzini defined you?
Weren’t you refracting just now
on my eye’s half-closed triptych
   the image, enhanced, of a glen—
"the foxgrape festoon as sere leaves fell"
on the sand-pale dark byroad, one leaf adrift
   from the thin-twigged persimmon; again,

            a bird—Arizona
caught-up-with, uncatchable cuckoo
after two hours’ pursuit, zigzagging
road-runner, stenciled in black
stripes all over, the tail
   windmilling up to defy me?
You understand terror, know how to deal
with pent-up emotion, a ballad, witchcraft.
   I don’t. O Zeus and O Destiny!

Unafraid of what’s done,
undeterred by apparent defeat,
you, imagnifico, unafraid
of disparagers, death, dejection,
have out-wiled the Mermaid of Zennor,
   made wordcraft irresistible:
reef, wreck, lost lad, and "sea-foundered bell"—
as near a thing as we have to a king—
   craft with which I don’t know how to deal.




Old Amusement Park

Before it became LaGuardia Airport

Hurry, worry, unwary
visitor, never vary
   the pressure till nearly bat-blind.
      A predicament so dire could not
      occur in this rare spot—

where crowds flock to the tramcar,
rattling greenish caterpillar,
   as bowling-ball thunder
      quivers the air. The park’s elephant
      slowly lies down aslant;

then pygmy replica rides
the mound the back provides.
   Jet black, a furry pony sits
      down like a dog, has an innocent air—
      no tricks—the best act there.

It’s all like the never-ending
Ferris-wheel ascending
   picket-fenced pony-rides (ten cents).
      A businessman, the pony-paddock boy
      locks his equestrian toy—

flags flying, fares collected,
shooting gallery neglected—
   half-official, half-sequestered,
      limber-slouched against a post,
      and tells a friend what matters least.

It’s the old park in a nutshell,
like its tame-wild carrousel—
   the exhilarating peak
      when the triumph is reflective
      and confusion, retroactive.




Charity Overcoming Envy

(Late-fifteenth-century tapestry, Flemish or French, in the Burrell Collection, Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum)

   Have you time for a story
   (depicted in tapestry)?
   Charity, riding an elephant,
on a "mosaic of flowers," faces Envy,
the flowers "bunched together, not rooted."
Envy, on a dog, is worn down by obsession,
his greed (since of things owned by others
he can only take some). Crouching uneasily
in the flowered filigree, among wide weeds
   indented by scallops that swirl,
little flattened-out sunflowers,
thin arched coral stems, and—ribbed horizontally—
slivers of green, Envy, on his dog,
   looks up at the elephant,
cowering away from her, his cheek scarcely scratched.
   He is saying, "O Charity, pity me, Deity!
   O pitiless Destiny,
   what will become of me,
maimed by Charity—Caritas—sword unsheathed
over me yet? Blood stains my cheek. I am hurt."
In chest armor over chain mail, a steel shirt
to the knee, he repeats, "I am hurt."
The elephant, at no time borne down by self-pity,
   convinces the victim
that Destiny is not devising a plot.

The problem is mastered—insupportably
tiring when it was impending.

Deliverance accounts for what sounds like an axiom.

   The Gordian knot need not be cut.




Saint Valentine,

permitted to assist you, let me see …
   If those remembered by you
are to think of you and not me,
   it seems to me that the memento
   or compliment you bestow
should have a name beginning with "V,"

such as Vera, El Greco’s only
   daughter (though it has never been
proved that he had one), her starchy
   veil, inside chiffon; the stone in her
   ring, like her eyes; one hand on
her snow-leopard wrap, the fur widely

dotted with black. It could be a vignette—
   a replica, framed oval—
bordered by a vine or vinelet.
   Or give a mere flower, said to mean the
   love of truth or truth of
love—in other words, a violet.

Verse—unabashedly bold—is appropriate;
   and always it should be as neat
as the most careful writer’s "8."
   Any valentine that is written
Is as the vendange to the vine.
   Might verse not best confuse itself with fate?




I’ve been Thinking ...


Make a fuss
and be tedious.

I’m annoyed?
yes; am—avoid

"adore"
and "bore";

am, I
say, by

the word
bore, bored;

refuse
to use

"divine"
to mean

something
pleasing;

"terrific color"
for some horror.

Though flat,
myself, I’d say that

"Atlas"
(pressed glass)

looks best
embossed.

I refuse
to use

"enchant,"
"dement";

even "fright-
ful plight"
(however justified)

or "frivol-
ous fool"
(however suitable).

I’ve escaped?
am still trapped

by these
word diseases.

No pauses—
the phrases

lack lyric
force; sound capric-

like Attic
capric-Alcaic,

or freak
calico-Greek.

(Not verse
of course)
I’m sure of this:

Nothing mundane is divine;
Nothing divine is mundane.




Love in America?

Whatever it is, it’s a passion—
a benign dementia that should be
engulfing America, fed in a way
   the opposite of the way
in which the Minotaur was fed.
It’s a Midas of tenderness;
   from the heart;
nothing else. From one with ability
to bear being misunderstood—
   take the blame, with "nobility
   that is action," identifying itself with
   pioneer unperfunctoriness

   without brazenness or
   bigness of overgrown
   undergrown shallowness.

Whatever it is, let it be without
   affectation.

Yes, yes, yes, yes.




Tippoo’s Tiger

The tiger was his prototype.
      The forefeet of his throne were tiger’s feet.
He mounted by a four-square pyramid of silver stairs converging as they rose.

The jackets of his infantry and palace guard
   bore little woven stripes incurved like buttonholes.

Beneath the throne an emerald carpet lay.
Approaching it, each subject kissed nine times
the carpet’s velvet face of meadow-green.

Tipu owned sixteen hunting-cats to course the antelope
until his one great polecat ferret with exciting tail
escaped through its unlatched hut-door along a plank
above a ditch; paused, drank, and disappeared—
   precursor of its master’s fate.

His weapons were engraved with tiger claws and teeth
in spiral characters that said the conqueror is God.
The infidel claimed Tipu’s helmet and cuirasse
and a vast toy, a curious automaton—
a man killed by a tiger; with organ pipes inside
from which blood-curdling cries merged with inhuman groans.
The tiger moved its tail as the man moved his arm.

      This ballad still awaits a tiger-hearted bard.
         Great losses for the enemy
      cannot make one’s own loss less hard.




"Like a Wave at the Curl"

On a kind of Christmas Day—
big flakes blurring everything,

cat-power matching momentum,

each kitten having capsized the other,

   one kitten fell;

the other’s hind leg planted hard

on the eye that had guided the onslaught—

ears laid back, both tails lashing—

a cynic might have said, "Sir Francis

   Bacon defined it:

‘Foreign war is like the heat of exercise;
civil war, like the heat of a fever.’"

Not at all. The expert would say,

   "Rather hard on the fur."




Appellate Jurisdiction

Fragments of sin are a part of me.
New brooms shall sweep clean the heart of me.
   Shall they? Shall they?

When this light life shall have passed away,
God shall redeem me, a castaway.
   Shall He? Shall He?




To William Butler Yeats on Tagore

It is made clear by the phrase,
Even the mood—by virtue of which he says

The thing he thinks—that it pays,
To cut gems even in these conscience-less days;

But the jewel that always
Outshines ordinary jewels, is your praise.




To a Friend in the Making

You wild, uncooked young fellow!
   The swinkèd hind will stumble home
      Not looking at the tasks he scorned to shirk.
   Impelled to respite by rough hands,
The labored ox will bellow;
      While you stand there agape before your handiwork.

Not all good men are mellow.
   You savor of a walnut rind,
      Of oak leaves, or plucked mullein on the brae.
   And yet with all your clumsiness,
You give me pleasure, fellow;
      Your candor compensates me for my old bouquet.




He Made This Screen

Not of silver nor of coral,
But of weatherbeaten laurel.

Here, he introduced a sea
Uniform like tapestry;

Here, a fig-tree; there, a face;
There, a dragon circling space—

Designating here, a bower;
There, a pointed passion-flower.




Holes Bored in a Workbag by the Scissors

A neat, round hole in the bank of the creek
   Means a rat;
      That is to say, craft, industry, resourcefulness:
         While
These indicate the unfortunate, meek
   Habitat
      Of surgery thrust home to fabricate useless
         Voids.




Apropos of Mice

Come in, Rat, and eat with me;
One must occasionally—
   If one would rate the rat at his true worth—
   Practice catholicity.

Cheeseparings and a porkrind
Stock my house—good of their kind
   But were they not, you would oblige me? Is
   Plenty, multiplicity?




The Just Man And

His pie. "I would be
Repossessed of all the
Superlatives that I have squandered,
That I might use them in praise of it."

The four and twenty
Birds were singing while he
Apportioned it off casually
And found in it nothing for himself.




In "Designing a Cloak to Cloak his Designs," you Wrested from Oblivion, a Coat of Immortality for your own Use.

Cowed by his uningenious will
Of dragon-like demeanor, till
It left them orphans.

His foibles clustered underneath
Him, dominated by a wreath
Of upright half notes.

Encumbered as he was with pride,
But for that coat he might have died
So despicably

That kindness might have seemed unkind
Had not the garment been designed
To serve two masters.




The Past is the Present

Revived bitterness
is unnecessary unless
   One is ignorant.

To-morrow will be
Yesterday unless you say the
   Days of the week back-

Ward. Last weeks’ circus
Overflow frames an old grudge. Thus:
   When you attempt to

Force the doors and come
At the cause of the shouts, you thumb
   A brass nailed echo.




Old Tiger

You are right about it; that wary,
presumptuous young baboon is nothing to you; and the chimpanzee?
   An exemplary hind leg hanging like a plummet at the end of a

string—the tufts of fur depressed like grass
on which something heavy has been lying—nominal ears of black glass—
   what is there to look at? And of the leopard, spotted underneath and on

its toes; of the American rattler,
his eyes on a level with the crown of his head and of the lesser
   varieties, fish, bats, greyhounds and other animals of one thickness,

the same may be said, they are nothing
to you and yet involuntarily you smile; as at the dozing,
   magisterial hauteur of the camel or the facial expression

of the parrot: you to whom a no
is never a no, loving to succeed where all others have failed, so
   constituted that opposition is pastime and struggle is meat, you

see more than I see but even I
see too much; the select many are all but one thing to avoid, my
   prodigy and yours—as well as those mentioned above, who cannot commit

an act of self-destruction—the will
apparently having been made part of the constitution until
   it has become subsidiary, but observe; in that exposition

is their passion, concealment, yours, they
are human, you are inhuman and the mysterious look, the way
   in which they comport themselves and the conversation imported from the

birdhouse, are one version of culture.
You demur? To see, to realize with a prodigious leap is your
   version and that should be all there is of it. Possibly so, but when one

is duped by that which is pleasant, who
is to tell one that it is too much? Attempt to brush away the Foo
   dog and it is forthwith more than a dog, its tail superimposed on its

self in a complacent half spiral—
incidentally so witty. One may rave about the barren wall
   or rave about the painstaking workmanship, the admirable subject;

the little dishes, brown, mulberry
or sea green, are half human and waiving the matter of artistry,
   anything which can not be reproduced, is "divine." It is as with the

book—that commodity inclusive
of the idea, the art object, the exact spot in which to live,
   the favorite item of wearing apparel. You have "read Dante’s Hell

till you are familiar with it"—till
the whole surface has become so polished as to afford no little
   seam or irregularity at which to catch. So here, with the wise few;

the shred of superior wisdom
has engaged them for such a length of time as somehow to have become
   a fixture, without rags or a superfluous dog’s ear by which to seize

it and throw it away before it
is worn out. As for you—forming a sudden resolution to sit
   still—looking at them with that fixed, abstracted lizardlike expression of

the eye which is characteristic
of all accurate observers, you are there, old fellow, in the thick
   of the enlightenment along with the cultured, the profusely lettered,

the intentionally hirsute—made
just as ludicrous by self appointedly sublime disgust, inlaid
   with wiry, jet black lines of objection. You, however, forbear when the

mechanism complains—scorning to
push. You know one thing, an inkling of which has not entered their minds; you
   know that it is not necessary to live in order to be alive.


