openly, yes, 
with the naturalness 
of the hippopotamus or the alligator 
when it climbs out on the bank to experience the 
sun, i do these 
things which i do, which please 
no one but myself. now i breathe and now i am submerged; 
the blemishes stand up and shout when the object 
in view was a 
renaissance; shall i say 
the contrary? the sediment of the river which 
encrusts my joints, makes me very gray but i am used 
to it, it may 
remain there; do away 
with it and i am myself done away with, for the 
patina of circumstance can but enrich what was 
there to begin 
with. this elephant skin 
which i inhabit, fibered over like the shell of 
the coconut, this piece of black glass through which no light 
can filter—cut 
into checkers by rut 
upon rut of unpreventable experience— 
it is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the 
hairy toed. black 
but beautiful, my back 
is full of the history of power. of power? what 
is powerful and what is not? my soul shall never 
be cut into 
by a wooden spear; throughout 
childhood to the present time, the unity of 
life and death has been expressed by the circumference 
described by my 
trunk; nevertheless, i 
perceive feats of strength to be inexplicable after 
all; and i am on my guard; external poise, it 
has its center 
well nurtured—we know 
where—in pride, but spiritual poise, it has its center where? 
my ears are sensitized to more than the sound of 
the wind. i see 
and i hear, unlike the 
wandlike body of which one hears so much, which was made 
to see and not to see; to hear and not to hear; 
that tree trunk without 
roots, accustomed to shout 
its own thoughts to itself like a shell, maintained intact 
by one who knows what strange pressure of the atmosphere; that 
spiritual 
brother to the coral 
plant, absorbed into which, the equable sapphire light 
becomes a nebulous green. the i of each is to 
the i of each, 
a kind of fretful speech 
which sets a limit on itself; the elephant is? 
black earth preceded by a tendril? it is to that 
phenomenon 
the above formation, 
translucent like the atmosphere—a cortex merely— 
that on which darts cannot strike decisively the first 
time, a substance 
needful as an instance 
of the indestructibility of matter; it 
has looked at the electricity and at the earth- 
quake and is still 
here; the name means thick. will 
depth be depth, thick skin be thick, to one who can see no 
beautiful element of unreason under it? 
