uplifted and waved until immobilized 
wistarialike, the opposing opposed 
mouse-gray twined proboscises’ trunk formed by two 
trunks, fights itself to a spiraled inter-nosed 
deadlock of dyke-enforced massiveness. it’s a 
knock-down drag-out fight that asks no quarter? just 
a pastime, as when the trunk rains on itself 
the pool it siphoned up; or when—since each must 
provide his forty-pound bough dinner—he broke 
the leafy branches. these templars of the tooth, 
these matched intensities, take master care of 
master tools. one, sleeping with the calm of youth, 
at full length in the half dry sun-flecked stream-bed, 
rests his hunting-horn-curled trunk on shallowed stone. 
the sloping hollow of the sleeper’s body 
cradles the gently breathing eminence’s prone 
mahout, asleep like a lifeless six-foot 
frog, so feather light the elephant’s stiff 
ear’s unconscious of the crossed feet’s weight. and the 
defenseless human thing sleeps as sound as if 
incised with hard wrinkles, embossed with wide ears, 
invincibly tusked, made safe by magic hairs! 
as if, as if, it is all ifs; we are at 
much unease. but magic’s masterpiece is theirs,— 
houdini’s serenity quelling his fears. 
elephant ear-witnesses-to-be of hymns 
and glorias, these ministrants all gray or 
gray with white on legs or trunk, are a pilgrims’ 
pattern of revery not reverence,—a 
religious procession without any priests, 
the centuries-old carefullest unrehearsed 
play. blessed by buddha’s tooth, the obedient beasts 
themselves as toothed temples blessing the street, see 
the white elephant carry the cushion that 
carries the casket that carries the tooth. 
amenable to what, matched with him, are gnat 
trustees, he does not step on them as the white- 
canopied blue-cushioned tooth is augustly 
and slowly returned to the shrine. though white is 
the color of worship and of mourning, he 
is not here to worship and he is too wise 
to mourn,—a life-prisoner but reconciled. 
with trunk tucked up compactly—the elephant’s 
sign of defeat—he resisted, but is the child 
of reason now. his straight trunk seems to say: when 
what we hoped for came to nothing, we revived. 
as loss could not ever alter socrates’ 
tranquillity, the elephant has contrived 
equanimity. with the socrates of 
animals as with sophocles the bee, on whose 
tombstone a hive was incised, sweetness tinctures 
his gravity. his held up fore-leg for use 
as a stair, to be climbed or descended with 
the aid of his ear, expounds the brotherhood 
of creatures to man the encroacher by the 
small word with the dot, meaning know,—the verb bd. 
these knowers, these distinct rememberers 
like bu˙ d, of what they have experienced, are 
"unable to pierce by one dart from the bow 
four plaintain-leaves laid at the points of a square"; 
and cannot, like buddha, change missiles to wreaths, 
alter their shape, bisect hairs in the dark, make 
their wisdom apparent in rays of all hues, 
or turn heat, exasperated, to earthquake- 
fire. yet they "arouse the feeling that they are 
allied to man" and can change roles with their trustees. 
hardship makes the soldier; then teachableness 
makes him the philosopher—as socrates, 
prudently testing the suspicious thing, knew 
the wisest is he who’s not sure that he knows. 
who rides on a tiger can never dismount; 
asleep on an elephant, that is repose. 
