half worm. we all, infant and adult, have 
stopped to watch the butterfly—last of the 
elves—and learned to spare the wingless worm 
that hopefully ascends the tree. the well-known 
silk tiger swallowtail 
of south america, with body lightly 
furred was that bearing pigments which engrave 
the lower wings with dragon’s blood, weightless. 
they that have wings must not have weights. this more 
peninsula-tailed one with a black 
pitchfork-scallop edge on sunburnt zebra-skin, 
tired by the trip it made 
with drover-like tenacity, has been 
sleeping upright on the elm. its yellowness, 
that of the autumn poplar-leaf, by day 
has been observed. disguised in butterfly- 
bush wedgwood-blue, psyche follows it 
to that small tree, micromalus, the midget 
crab; to the mimosa; 
and from that, to the flowering pomegranate. 
baffled not by the quick-clouding serene gray 
moon but forced by the hot hot sun to pant, 
she stands on rug-soft grass; though "it is not 
permitted to gaze informally 
on majesty in such a manner as might 
well happen here." the blind 
all-seeing butterfly, fearing the slight 
finger, wanders, as though it were ignorant, 
across the path and lights on zephyr’s palm, 
planting forefeet soberly; then pawing 
like a horse, turns round—apostrophe- 
tipped brown antennae: porcupining out as 
it arranges nervous 
wings. vexed because curiosity has 
been pursuing it, it cannot now be calm. 
the butterfly’s round unglazed china eyes, 
pale tobacco brown, with the large eyes of 
the nymph on them—gray eyes that now are 
black, for she with controlled agitated glance 
observes the insect’s face 
and all’s a-quiver with significance— 
enact the scene of cats’ eyes on the magpie’s 
eyes, by goya. butterflies do not need 
home advice. as though zephyr and psyche 
were patent-leather cricket singing 
loud, and gnat-catching garden-toad, the swallow- 
tail bewitched and danger- 
ous, springs away, zebra half-deified, 
trampling the air as it tramples the flowers, feed- 
ing where it pivots. twig-veined irascible 
fastidious stubborn undisciplined 
zebra! sometimes one is grateful to 
a stranger for looking very nice. but free 
to leave the outspread hand 
it flies, drunken with triviality 
or guided by visions of strength, off until, 
diminishing like wreckage on the sea, 
rising and falling easily, it mounts 
the swell and keeping its true course with 
what swift majesty, indifferent to 
us, is gone. deaf to ap- 
proval—magnet-nice, as it flutters through 
airs now slack, now fresh. it has strict ears when the 
west wind speaks. it was he, with mirror eyes 
of strong anxiety, who had no net 
or flowering shrewd-scented tropical 
device, or lignum vitae perch in half-shut 
hand; for ours is not a 
canely land; nor was it oberon, but 
this quiet young man with piano replies, 
named zephyr, whose hand spread out was enough 
to tempt the fiery tiger-horse to stand, 
eyes staring skyward and chest arching 
bravely out—historic metamorphoser 
and saintly animal 
in india, in egypt, anywhere. 
his talk was as strange as my grandmother’s muff. 
