we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
