encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
