ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
the terrible beauty of the reserve 
everyone's uncle thinks that they are the world's most handsomendn, and no one says otherwise. 
rez dogs roam about without having to perform emotional labour for humans. they eat where they 
are welcomed, which is everywhere. most who live here do not know that they are in the ruins of a sick 
experiment that failed. teens blaze to feel the euphoria of being outside of memory. 
we all bathe in the sociality of the hangover. it is not that no one has time for themselves, it is that they are 
always playing cards or talking about connor mcdavid or carpooling to bingo or babysitting their brothers' kids. 
we all owe something to someone, so we congregate under the pretense of debt, and this is always-already. 
we all joke about falling in love with our cousins, but we are all perpetually falling in love with our cousins 
in a platonic way, because we grew up together and no one was alienated by the tyranny of the couple form. 
vehicles pass through in droves, but no one looks, so we drown together in the freedom of utter anonymity. 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
when i first saw them, slipped 
from his woollen swim-trunks, so shamelessly 
war-time and loose at the inner thigh, 
i was surprised 
to find what finally made a man 
a man, this bruised fruit 
like something forgotten in a lunch pail— 
this was what all the fuss was about 
when the boys clutched themselves, keeled over 
in mock pain like big cry-babies. 
that every boy who taunted me 
should have an awkward, jiggering set 
of something akin to my mother's 
bitter tulip bulbs (i'd once tasted one on a whim) 
well, it seemed a cruel joke 
how i'd flowered into being 
as a wary child. 
and when in september 
the teacher asked us, restless one by one, 
to name the things learned in our summers away, 
a few swept faces clearly coy or lying 
in reports of train wrecks or rare fossils, 
i thought of my father, 
that puzzlement of flesh and flounce between his legs, 
his frailty bared, 
and wondered how my mother did it, 
kept him safe; 
when once i'd believed my father, 
secret and entire— 
someone to be watched 
in a fearless diving from the bright shore 
into the dark, stirred waters— 
and said nothing. 
transition 
it's this not knowing 
when the guest will leave 
and you are the guest. 
not quite knowing where 
to sit, the couch?, or how 
often to clean or cook before 
it's more a chore 
for your host 
who seems to be a horse 
with eyes that narrow 
in the wide open of your stay. 
i've not once mentioned 
a higher power and now 
here is this horse. her coat 
is the colour of how much 
night is required to see 
the barely glowing light switch 
i speak to from bed. 
where can we possibly 
go from here? 
and look if i knew 
where i left my 
light jacket 
i'd put it on already. 
i am aman going crazy 
because he has seen 
a colour no one else has 
but there is no way 
to prove it. it exists 
for no one but him. 
it is the colour of my jacket, 
i'm certain. i'm going to need it. 
it's almost spring. 
tu me manques 
is how the french miss. 
backward. like car wheels in commercials. 
you me miss. every possible word in the wrong 
place. there are only three. 
i had a 
farm in africa, no just a friend on the french-swiss 
border who argued the english i miss you 
didn't make any sense. had? how could you 
meaning me miss you meaning him. easy. 
you he explained miss me because we are not together. 
who's missing? i wanted to know. you are. you are 
gone somewhere from me. la lune. i cannot be missing 
from myself. ever. you are missing from me and here 
he clamped a love handle and that causes me great 
how do you say l'angoisse. 
we are apart now 
we never met actually we skyped our whole 
drosophiliac friendship together. he made a joke once 
when i asked for details (he had a postdoc 
on breast cancer proteins) that he was in charge 
of terminating the rats. by guillotine. that was the joke. 
then he spoke very quickly the real way—an injection 
i think. how faint the tune. i could never tell 
how tall he was or ask correctly how high 
the moon. 
as long as we're longing i had a 
farm in africa, no just another friend on the border 
of rwanda and the congo who said i miss you 
for tu me manques was a perfect and incorrect 
translation. just trust me. everything makes sense 
until you have to explain it. have? you don't say 
tu m'aimes for i love you. correct. that is very true 
but surtout because i don't love you. see the stars 
how they shine for you. wait, wait, wait. not you, 
not your words, not your feeling. 
under construction 
you'd think that empty lot 
had slaughtered their 
mothers the way those 
men torture it 
with yellow machines. with how 
little sleep you've been 
getting, you think a lot 
of sinister things, especially 
these mornings when light 
is the translucent grey 
of fake teeth. your dad 
used to bring you home 
dinosaur bones from the states 
he razed to lay highways. 
you can't remember when 
you realized trucks run 
on a broth of ancient lizards 
but now they'll never not 
feel haunted. it's important 
to get places but you 
doubt another condo tower 
beside the train line 
will do more than rattle 
like a yahtzee cup tossing 
professional couples. 
you keep the fossils 
like jewellery on your dresser, 
stroke their tar settings 
until they look wet. a view, 
more sleep, a new life 
with fewer machines— 
you've wanted so 
much for so long you 
don't remember living 
without the fuel light on. 
an invisible raptor stands 
behind you in a business 
suit, factoring in inflation 
with his talon on your hand. 
union station 
two point five metres beyond herself, 
the octopus cannot see. all retinae shoot radii— 
mine, for instance, tell me there's no lover here, 
not even to my side. this is the longest room 
i occupy with any regularity, train tracks going on upon 
an indoor horizon. back here, we seers-off 
stand straight beside an expanse no hairstring of neurons 
would survive a serious fathoming of. 
it causes a longing, a pressurized pinch 
the valsalva maneuver could not 
slough off. if showing signs of boredom, the octopus 
is handed an eyeless, noseless, 
mouthless, earless, moustacheless mr. potato head. 
in her final year, she dotes 
on empty eggs. in the pan, she really shrinks. how do we 
measure her peripheral 
limits in imperial units? eight feet exactly. you can't 
make this stuff up. 
when you're the one watching, not taking up air in, 
the train, time 
passes notionally, how it's said to pass on a coastal 
periphery. 
but some things that are getting smaller really are getting 
smaller 
and some are just getting away. 
witch hunt 
too many wannabe aleister crowleys 
con our teeth from us for pleasure, 
stir our cauldrons counterclockwise 
on the wrong stroke with their bent cocks. 
remember when they scorned us as faddish, 
trend-witches, all while whipping out 
their wands for instagram? remember 
when they blamed us for the limpness 
of their lyrics, beat our bodies, stole 
the markings they left, and passed these 
off as newfound runes? my warlock 
gaslights me for breakfast. poisons me, 
then vomits in my lap and plays at victim. 
my pain is really his is all my fault is just 
a curse he has to bear. he dolls me up, 
one hand shoved up my ass not quite 
without consent, to puppet at my mouth 
and make the world watch me say ‘papa' 
is a good ventriloquist. he calls this hoo- 
doo, like his white skin knew dark magic 
only as a sonic boon to juice for praise 
from other fools. he only asks forgiveness 
for his mental illness causing him 
to cause my mental illness, which is less real 
than his own. he says he needs my wisdom 
teeth for spellcraft, but the spell is one 
to cast my words against women like us. 
let's watch him claim this is a witch hunt, 
like the rest. let's be the bitch cunts 
he regrets, as though we women never 
once were burned when forced to stoke 
the flames for our own funerals. as though 
we witches cannot hunt where we were hunted. 
racter poems 
awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
uninhabited 
changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
injun 
he played in gods country 
where boys proved themselves clean 
dumb beasts who could cut fire 
out of the whitest sand 
he played english across the trail 
where girls turned plum wild 
garlic and strained words 
through the window of night 
he spoke through numb lips and 
breathed frontier 
omnivore 
i eat what's put in front of me, 
as all great men do. should you eat shark? i know 
some wouldn't, but i do, if it's there. 
scorpions too, and their stingers; swallowing a scorpion 
won't poison you. old-time glue-makers 
made glue of old horses, and i 
make use when i can. 
someone put his wife in front of me; someone else, 
his mediocrity. what i know, i swear by— 
feed yourself, or die. 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on a rainy morning in the worst year 
of my life, as icy eyelets shelled the street, 
i shared a tremor with a doberman 
leashed to a post. we two were all the world 
until a bicyclist shot by, riding 
like a backward birth, feetfirst, 
in level, gentle ease, with the season's hard breath 
between his teeth. the rain was almost ice, the sky 
mild and pale. i saw a milk carton bobbing by 
on a stream of melting sleet. 
a bicyclist. a bicyclist. he rode away— 
to his home, i guess. i went home, 
where i undressed, left my jacket 
where it fell, went straight to bed, and slept 
for two days straight. but those clicking wheels 
kept clicking in my head, and though 
i can't say why, i felt not only not myself, 
but that i'd never been… that i 
was that man i hardly saw, hurling myself 
into the blast, and that everything 
i passed—dog, rain, cold, the other guy— 
i left in my wake, like afterbirth. 
on day and night (james arthur) 
and as the neighbors' guests retire, coaxing their cars 
into the snow (we're gazing through the curtain 
into winter's pale hub) two girls gaze up. they're all 
going home, like wheels correcting 
into steering hands, or drawn breath returning to the air, 
but you can't come back to anywhere—there's no perfect here 
and there, or now and then—but here we are, 
again. a silverfish crosses the windowpane. we peer 
into the street, and up at the stranded moon: white wheel, 
black field. black winter, white road. white silence, 
black wind. white cars, black wires. 
the sympathy of angels 
being of tragic bent 
we incline to the future 
and the past. but we 
see you. we 
see how tired you are 
as you lean on your rifle 
or your shovel. 
we see the fired shells 
and the head they go into. 
we too are shells, 
you too are graves. 
equally to all men, we 
have nothing to say. 
adore. we are just. we 
serve a monarch 
in a silk sarcophagus. 
a local history 
my grandmother's house was always full of flies. 
they'd crawl across each other on the windowsill 
or would be spinning out their noisy dying 
everywhere, in such number, you could sweep forever 
and not get all the dead flies off the floor. out of the house 
and downhill, in a marsh of cattails and bristle-sided reeds, 
milkweed pods kept cracking open, leaking seed across the air, 
renewing the existence of their species 
in the way they'd done from year to year. 
way back when, some hard-handed methodist pioneer 
had somehow wrenched up every stone 
big enough to break a plough, 
and piled them all throughout the woods, 
where they still were, in mounds, when i was growing up: 
like barrows heaped above the decomposed remains 
of the violent saxon kings, whose grave-goods 
featured large in my imagination. 
my grandmother's gone. before she died, she lost her words, 
her house, her name, but for me, she's still a hard old woman 
walking downhill at dawn, long into autumn, 
to skinny-dip in her weed-choked, freezing pond. 
a hedge of wind, a wall of suburban snow— 
my father's father's ashes are in the ground 
in southern ontario. something i read in college 
and for whatever reason have not forgotten 
is that the saxon barrow-makers, 
living among the wrecks of roman buildings 
they could not copy 
or restore, saw themselves as late arrivers, as an after-folk 
living on the graves of a greater folk 
who'd gone before. where is the horse, where the rider, 
some now-nameless saxon wrote, 
grieving for a people who his own forebears 
had annihilated, assimilated, 
or driven into the sea. 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak. the old ones know 
of this kind of shape-shifting: sometimes i sweat and sweat until my 
bones puddle on the carpet in my living room and i am like the water 
that comes before new life. 
i was born during a falling leaves moon; which is to say that i have 
always been good at sacrifice. it is believed that women are most 
powerful during their moontime and because of this do not take part 
in ceremonies in order to let the body cleanse itself. there are 
weesageechak days when gender is a magic trick i forgot how to 
perform and my groin floods and floods trying to cleanse itself like 
the women and i too become toxic for men who have built cages out 
of broken boys. 
maybe if i surrendered myself to grandmother moon she would know 
what to do with these pickaxe wounds. there is so much i need to tell 
her about how my rivers and lakes are crowded and narrowing. how i 
managed to piece together a sweat lodge out of mud and fish and 
bacteria. she gives me the cree name weesageechak and translates it to 
"sadness is a carcass his tears leave behind." 
and the crows and flies who don't care about gender will one day 
make away with my jet-black finger nails and scraggly armpit hairs. 
they will lay tobacco at my grave and tell their crow and fly kin that i 
was once a broad-shouldered trickster who long ago fell from the 
moon wearing make-up and skinny jeans. 
love is a moontime teaching 
love is a moontime teaching 
is your kookum's crooked smile when you pick up the phone 
is another word for body 
body is another word for campfire smoke 
campfire smoke is the smell he leaves behind in your bed sheets after 
the breakup 
the word for hate sex is forest 
forest sometimes means hope or lonely (depends on who you ask) 
lonely is a movie called taxi zum klo about white gay men 
who risk tiptoeing through desire's minefields 
for ten minutes of something better than living 
living is going to bingo to pay the bills 
after you quit your job that barely paid the bills 
paying the bills is sometimes a metaphor for cancer 
cancer is a diagnosis handed down to an 18-year old girl from the rez 
the rez is another word for body 
the body is a myth 
is the only good news the doctor gives you when your cells run amok 
amok is the border the skin doesn't remember 
how to secure anymore 
anymore is the feeling you get when a police officer 
pulls you over because he thinks you're driving a stolen vehicle 
a stolen vehicle is the nickname you give to love. 
mornings with the one glove 
encased in the new five-fingered nomex shield 
recently lost to the space race and run aground 
in the suburbs, i stand before the mirror and soothe 
my flyaway hair with the om comb. 
in the kitchen, i reify 
a slice of toast with am jam, watch 
from the window as the neighbourhood id kid 
takes one giant leap and clears the fence. 
his parents were like everyone, swept up 
in the us fuss, advancing the species faster 
than the russians. hurrying to make their own 
clone and send it out there, the latest ape shape 
clomping around the garden barefaced as a dartboard. 
back then, i too felt the night ignite 
with passion; for a few giddy years 
there were fumblings, scaldings, dropped casseroles, 
but now i've got a grip. five times stronger than steel, 
look what we can do, i remind myself, 
and dump my coffee dregs down the ink sink, 
that fathomless black hole. heave my kevlar coat 
off the rack and leave for irk 
work before the ought rot sets in. 
down the stairs, on the once and future side of the or door, 
i see the neighbour girls have abandoned 
the nameless secret they were building. 
instead, set up a lawn salon 
in their front yard. one girl transforming 
the other with i dye, her hatchling boyfriend watching 
from the you pew. i think the rocketship wreckage 
might still be on fire—that, or maybe 
there are hot coals where i'm walking. yes, 
a crack, a crater, and then a glimpse 
of the hissing ur-face surface, 
the faith test, the scorcher. 
but my moonboots are the real thing, 
nasa cast-offs. lately nothing can touch me. 
i see the kid again—he's climbed to the top 
of the battleship jungle gym across the way 
in the ark park, surveys the monkey bars 
like an odd god debating flood. 
the swings are at autumn 
bottom; it's a long countdown to next liftoff. 
i fish my keys from my pocket. 
something's missing. love? a hovercraft, 
something to take me ninety miles above i'm time 
into the tuneless everblasting in-it minute? 
i can thrust my hands straight into the fire, 
withstand 450 degrees 
of separation, nothing will ever be too farfetched again. i bury any uncertainty 
in the utter clutter of the i'll file—think about this later. 
feel happier in nine seconds 
i learned the secret of serenity 
by waterboarding daffodils. 
my buddha is landfill. 
my mantra choked 
from a bluebird's neck. 
it's ruthless, the pursuit 
of happiness. eighteen 
seconds have elapsed. 
my happiness is twice 
your size, gold-chained 
to the lamppost. it strains 
its waistcoat as it grows. 
flog a sunbeam, harness 
a cloud. you should be feeling 
five times happier now: 
the world is your kleenex. 
it's been a long sixty-three 
seconds in attawapiskat, 
but my happiness digs 
diamond mines, slobbers 
parasol knobs on the rhine. 
i sweeten my cantaloupe 
with stolen breastmilk. 
peak joy is at nine 
times nine—saddle up, dear. 
an asteroid of happiness 
is blasting through 
the atmosphere. 
water glass 
sure fooled me. 
had me right up 
to the tinselly scraping 
when i downed 
the last mouthful 
and the ice cube turned 
out to be glass. 
arrowhead. 
shark's fin. 
lifting it out 
nearly cost me a finger 
never mind 
the carnage it 
could've caused 
in the throat. 
awe around the table 
as if i'd gone 
inadvertent skydiving 
or breezed through 
a tiger rodeo just while 
sipping, squeezing in 
a lime. see 
how the trick is turned. 
thrilling to be fooled so, 
like when i went to check 
the time in paris 
and a thief 's hummingbird 
caress left me gaping 
at my naked wrist. 
that was a touch 
i never felt, but this time 
i'm suffered to see 
how i'm spared. 
everyone wanted to touch it, tap, 
test their fingers on the edge. 
makes you want 
to try your luck again, 
the way a carnival bohunkus 
gawps at the stage; 
then jets his hand 
in the air with ballooning 
faith. me, me, 
pick me, mister. 
saw me in half. 
i believe. 
african evening 
i had a thing for mange. 
her skin was fluorescent with it. 
the open canoe made smooth, curling sounds. 
it smelled like the man i am told is mother. 
mother sped his brain on pills. 
he limped. 
he gripped mother's leg and begged. 
the long open canoe had a wind inside 
and a yellow sky and a smell of mother. 
i went to the docks to pray. 
the trees were yellow, the trees were orange 
and her panties had been cut away. 
i had a thing for docks and praying on the little bronze pipes. 
i stained them with my fluid. 
i had a bald thing, a bashed in thing, a thing for her grease. 
in my arms i held an end of the long canoe and slit it 
sternum-first into the sea. 
a spectre is haunting europe 
but i feel the sun cocooning 
in a triple-breasted track suit 
when i think of you. thus we 
obtain our concept of the unconscious 
from the theory of repression, a sweet finish 
after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets, 
my tender-roni, my maytag blue – 
for real, you like them dresses? i'll bag the whole rack – let 
the ruling classes tremble 
homecoming 
beside me a woman moves her lips 
and i wonder if she's praying. 
with his stunted machine 
gun the checkpoint soldier waves 
us down, stilling the drum and creak 
of the tro-tro bus. in front of me 
tightly strapped to a woman in bright 
aqua homecoming cloth, a baby 
stops gurgling, lays his head 
down on her brown back, 
closes his eyes. we file out into 
a heat and red dust field. 
a guardhouse, thin and shaky 
like the soldiers, crumbling mud 
walls, tin roof half ripped open 
like a can of smoked oysters. 
from somewhere, more guards 
appear, more guns with taped-on 
crescent-shaped magazines. 
the one who waved us in walks 
down the line, stopping at a watch, 
shirt collar, face, as though 
inspecting troops in the independence 
day parade. reeking of palm 
wine, he sways and his dented 
gun sways. beside me a woman 
moves her lips and i wonder 
if she's praying. someone's got 
enough of what the soldiers want 
and what is it. from her cloth bag 
i smell pepper-smoke, dried fish. 
the noon sun hits. who among us 
won't get back on the bus? 
peering at a child's sandals, the soldier 
leans over too far, hitting 
the red dirt hard. we don't say 
anything. another soldier shouts 
and points at the fallen man 
and the soldiers all laugh. 
the one on the ground curses, 
leans heavily on his gun 
like a field hockey player getting 
back on his feet. but he's 
not a hockey player. 
and that's when it starts. 
happiness is not the only happiness 
my hair has grown well past my shoulders, 
a feat i achieved by not cutting it. 
also this year i have learned something new 
about daylight. it keeps us awake. 
likewise the moonlight, the searchlight, 
the low blue glow on the dashboard 
that carries each through her own private dark. 
rue is a sun-loving plant. 
tornadoes want us to chase them. 
when summer finally arrives it arrives 
in a rainstorm. wind enters the spruce 
and comes out wearing sparrows. 
some say water tastes best 
from a bucket, some say a cupped palm. 
ideal world 
nothing matters in an ideal world. 
not the stones you skip, 
not the fat birds overhead. 
run your fingers through the sand all day. 
lie still as a ship at the bottom of the sea. 
stick out your tongue 
and taste the wrecked century 
in a melting snowcone purchased for a peso. 
all you taste is the taste of it. 
light plucks the coins from your eyes, 
the heart spends its store 
on a few everlastings 
jutting from cracks in the boardwalk. 
call it a kingdom nevertheless. 
watch the light black canopy 
lower from the west 
where a rust-stained tanker spins 
a slow pirouette en route to oblivion 
via sudan. 
if you feel lonely 
it's because you were borne this way. 
if there are clouds here 
they must be ideal clouds. 
clouds you can see through. 
if you see it what is it you see 
i didn't look at the fire. 
i looked into it. 
i saw a wall of books 
crash down and bury me 
centuries deep in red leather. 
i saw a statue in a park 
shake dust from its fist 
and a ship called everything 
sink down on rusted wings. 
ten thousand triangles collapsed 
into a point 
and the point was this. 
i cannot tell you what i saw. 
my catastrophe was sweet 
and nothing like yours 
although we may sip 
from the same 
broken cup all afternoon. 
the myth of orpheus 
and i came to in a room with a draft 
that issued from beneath a swinging door, 
my head plugged up like a sink stuffed 
with months of shed hair, 
shaving stubble, other things 
that thought to disappear. 
and the covers were bunched 
at my waist like a marble effigy 
of christ newly sprung from the cross, 
unveiling an inch of midriff, 
my navel, which in the hospital light 
looked like a wound from a hollow-point. 
and the old man in a nearby bed 
kept dying. the monitor would shriek 
its air-raid warning and he would die 
and come back. that was his trick. 
he did it and did it. the slap-slap 
of the nurses' soles was deliberate 
applause. then he left for good. 
my wife said that when i was dead, 
or during my death, she paced the garden 
with my jacket on, cupping votive flames 
to cigarettes. she killed each 
match with a flick of her wrist, 
then laid the burnt corpses to rest 
in a packet scored with scratches 
from matchstick heads that sought 
to light the way, and did, and died. 
tendrils of smoke grew into the sky 
as vines climbing from tomblike shade. 
she stood, then, and helped me to my feet, 
led me down the corridor 
to find a cup of tea—past an orderly 
who wheeled an assemblage 
of bed, old woman, and iv— 
not looking back to see if i was there. 
the meaning of life 
it could be that this line drawn taut 
between my fist and bonnie's kite— 
the nylon wings and plastic strut— 
is closer than i'll come to revelation. 
or trust, i mean, in the sort of heaven 
a feather's width between the fingertips 
of god and adam insinuates, 
their faith enduring on a chapel ceiling. 
i'm the kind of man whose mind 
is often flocked with herring gulls 
that dive for chicken skins in parking lots. 
and yet, at times, i almost grasp 
what's lost down on this lower plane: 
the pull of unseen hands, a gentle tug. 
tangled string; me staring up. 
the ship 
i was in a bar between duckworth and water 
on my way through a hooting mob 
of clappers and stompers, 
a swaying mass of drunk post-teens, 
when this kid, bespectacled, barely 
a sliver of bark off a birch rod, 
pitched suddenly forward 
as if standing on the deck 
of a ship in heavy seas. 
i caught him as he fell, 
and ducking under an arm, 
dragged him to the exit 
like simon towing christ's 
cross down the road. 
turns out he'd fallen earlier, 
lost his footing in a puddle of beer 
and struck the edge of a table. 
now, three drinks later, he was slipping 
beneath whatever we take to be 
our conscious lives. no matter. 
i slung him on the steps across the way 
and went to ring an ambulance, 
the kid jerking like a dreaming dog 
on the hot scent of rabbits; 
frothing at the mouth now, rabid. 
when i came back out, 
good samaritan, glad to be of help, 
he was chatting up a pair of girls, 
pants piss-stained. 
i told him about the ambulance. 
he said, i don't know what's wrong 
with me. i don't know either. 
what's wrong with any of us, i mean. 
part of the main 
you might say that a clod washed away 
diminishes the whole, the contours 
of the land effaced by saintly 
patience of the tide, which knows 
that in time its tiny contributions 
add up to subtract from the shore, 
but this has all been said before, 
and better, long ago. carping on 
about it like the bloody-minded sea 
that drags its weight back and forth 
across the beach stones—madwoman 
at a washboard trying to scrub 
away the stain of what she's done— 
won't change the fact that it's easier 
to turn your back on everyone. 
show me bloated bellies on the television, 
dead children in their mothers' arms, 
bomb blasts making burnt-on 
crusts of people, and i will weep 
a rainy season, clench my fists 
until the nails leave lifeline sickles, 
but otherwise do nothing. 
i lack conviction. i am content 
to have my outraged moment, then sink 
into the comfort of an armchair 
that won't protest when i protest 
against the state of a continent 
worn down by indifference. 
despite this slow erosion 
of my sense of self 
as a moral being, i am happy 
paying for the services i'm given. 
my rooms are lit electrically; 
my rooms are heated. 
and in the middle of a heated moment, 
arguing with my wife over bills, 
over money to pay for all the luxury, 
i think: it's nice to have the luxury 
of fighting over debts. so i find myself 
indebted to people i have never met, 
those murdered by my radio 
while i drive the kids to school. 
i kill the volume so they won't know 
how much i owe the world, 
or turn the dial to crashing waves 
that wash away the dead. 
iain lachlan campbell 
the can command a room. the bevel-fisted 
mayor of sackville, the renison dean, sire 
of four children. the wake up at six and read 
the paper until his ears turned red and shook. 
the recorder of the demise of his canada, 
the staunch, the solid, deliverer of grace at 
dinner, the turkey carving, owlish eye-browed 
thick-knuckled brooder, diabetic candy-stasher, 
home-video spanish-breast ogler, after dinner 
own chest-napper, model railway builder, 
false hip bearer. the devouree of cancer from 
anus to eyeball. the caved-chest weeper, 
holder of hands, composer of own elegy, 
which i read, in part, shaking at the pulpit. 
et in arcadia ego 
hard to make out a particular figure: the faces 
pressed to the portholes, seeds stowed in oily 
cloth, or a swaying lamp altering the hold. 
the actual vessel & the metamorphic bridge of 
a husband & wife: a ladder across the ocean, two 
horses over land, the first stake as a crude house 
coalesces from the forest. and we to thy service 
build our homes on the acres, & as one generation 
begins to stabilize the mirage with basswood & moss, 
the i must or else the wintry land will have them 
relaxes its grip on the family: barns tatter, rust 
builds in the shed, field marking boulders slip 
back asleep as trains bear the children away to 
lift toil from the bones of the hand like a scythe 
& try to balance it against a desk in their heads. 
some take podiums, some preach, one will invest in 
machinery after a bullet whizzing through a tent turned 
hair white as he stitched things back inside men. 
still others will undergo the loss of their minds 
as if the same sheer will that seeded the stolen land 
planted also a chaos that came boiling up like oil 
or else they drifted through towns like glaciers, calved 
in thin blue lunacy to commune with something terribly 
wide. so our heads may have grown thick with others' 
reflexes & to flinch under shadows in the ceiling might be 
a house born burning in the child's mind. o distant country 
perpetual, fields, fields of rye—even in arcadia, there am i. 
the fifth season 
fifteen minutes in any direction is all 
cornfields antlers and leaning 
barns' definition of extinction, 
porch collections of tins and paint 
brushes writing down the most recent 
myth of where our ghosts go 
and whether they'll hold 
here like the oldest teacher in town 
uncertain if he emptied the vodka 
before his cup filled with rain. 
the town good fortune drove 
through and kept on going, left 
generations to sweep dust, 
letters fallen from the theatre 
marquee and the smell of diesel 
persistent as the mottled 
bark of the sycamores that cracked 
before the brick face of the town 
turned red and laid the rest 
in the old river dreaming. 
and you who left the town, 
city after city while you sleep 
curled like a question are 
taken back on these walks 
eyelids ghosted along the bare 
lit streets lost looking for the reason 
the shape of your leaving became 
the shape of your seeing: 
nameless as the fifth season 
of the old river dreaming. 
funny 
on the bus today, a man looked like you with your teeth 
removed, his lips a wild party on his face. father, you 
are not yet dead, though doctors keep removing bits 
of you. soon you'll carry me around, a few floaters in a jar, 
you shout through the phone. that shouldn't be funny, 
but is, the way it was funny you telling me to apologize 
to objects i bruised myself on as a child—don't tell me 
you hurt the cupboard door. it stopped me from crying. 
in this city where so many beggars look like you, i am 
stitching what i know about you into poems, sewing you 
together before you die, before i have to oblige you 
by just dumping your body into the ocean. how do i say 
you loved my mother through thirty years of sickness 
alongside your love of pork'n'beans and pilsner? to what 
do i affix your russian moustache? i know i will never fit 
in the fishing lessons i failed, the gray days i wandered 
away from you into the bushes. father, i never told you— 
i drank river water; i flipped over dead fish with a stick. 
victoria soto 
in the poem i show to no one, a young teacher hides 
her students from a gunman, lifts 
them into cupboards—her hands smoothing 
their hair, closing cupboard doors. thousands of miles 
away, snow falls into a small northern town 
where i write, twenty children fell as snow. the light 
turned less familiar as it reflected 
off their bodies. i've never been to connecticut, 
but i imagine a town hall filled with photo albums, 
yellow roses, teddy bears, family members circling small 
tables, retelling the story of twenty 
short lives—they woke, ate cereal, and a stranger walked 
into their school with his hands full 
of guns. i stay awake all night, clicking through holes 
in the internet, finding her photo, victoria, thumb-sized 
with dark hair, light eyes, clear skin. she stared 
directly into the camera and then, how much later, hid 
children in cupboards and turned 
to the shooter to collect a violence the television 
calls "random". it turns over in me, repeats as snow 
repeats—on the radio, television, in the thin voices 
of my neighbours—when twenty children fell, 
the world felt less familiar—and falling again with each 
retelling, the snow and the stranger, 
the teacher who smoothed their hair. 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
over dinner, my landlady laughs 
about her day teaching rich korean kids 
the difference between a nightstand 
and a one-night stand. her son goes wild 
for the bicycle pump. from his highchair, 
he wails, erupting borscht. refuses to sit 
without its hard plastic denting his chin. 
i don't get relationships. once i got lace 
panties in the mail from a friend who lives 
in winnipeg. he wrote, i'm coming to visit 
you at christmas! so i spent december 
pretending to be busy, ice-skating until 
my feet purpled, wondering how love 
could transpire so oppositely between two 
people. my mother once loved a grey van so 
completely she sat in it for twenty minutes 
every winter morning while it defrosted. 
they listened to the radio together, to her 
favourite tapes. the van went everywhere 
with her, unlike my father who plays poker. 
it lived for thirteen years in our driveway, 
a great burgundy-upholstered beacon 
of dependability, until its engine went. 
i want to climb into you and strap myself in, 
but that's not really love. instead, we idle 
in separate uncertainties, exhausting 
reassurances. you thank my landlady 
for dinner and roll away into a night 
that imperfectly intersects my own, and i try 
to stop imagining the ways we could fail 
each other, and the people in rooms 
everywhere who are continually failing 
each other, and hope toward someday 
having one nightstand with you, maybe two. 
harvest moon lantern festival 
we got lost by the salmon-shaped lantern school 
watching roe bulbs hatch into tadpole matches 
and arrive in a field of lantern wheat transfixed 
by how they lit candles so small. a lantern 
thought bubble above your head says maybe 
we could hold hands inside your jacket pocket. 
a lantern reads, follow me for more lanterns. 
we follow the crowd following directions 
on their lantern phones. great horned owl lantern. 
lantern hamlet lecturing his unlit skull. a bouquet 
of carnations in lantern colours. a lantern your niece 
made out of a soup can, three nails, and her feelings. 
a lantern i just wrote. a woman plucks a harp 
behind an illuminated nativity scene—which half 
is the lantern? two tweenage lanterns kissing. 
an electric lantern shaped like nothing in itself 
emits silhouettes of geese and sighs of mothers 
disapproving recent piercings. their lantern book 
club has just uncorked another malbec. 
a man drizzling food colouring on a projector 
is a sort of lonely man lantern growing cold 
in a field of impatient children. impatient 
children in neon windbreakers are excellent 
lanterns and continue burning past bedtime. 
lantern shaped like that ugly thing i said 
at breakfast, quit looking at it. lantern lime 
as a hangover, crying into the garburator. 
a lantern says, it's your turn to do the dishes. 
another says, let's leave them ‘til tomorrow. 
historical lantern figures we've looked up 
at since childhood. you photograph me between 
gertrude and a flying pig. little boat who brought 
my dad to canada—float on that ocean of light 
a while longer, ferrying souls to safer shores. 
click-bait lantern and us crowded around waiting 
for kittens and life-hacks to load. it's too shiny 
and aimed at us. i just want to carve a face 
onto an orange vegetable with you, a big 
crooked grin with three teeth, but i know 
we'll leave it to rot on the stoop until february. 
there's nothing like a lantern to make us guilty 
for our many moods. there's nothing like a lantern. 
even in the hail it sits in its same face. even 
when i say, you're a real asshole, it glows. 
it's ok, you say, we're just lanterns waiting for a volunteer's hands to place candles inside us—then the crowd might huddle in our light. 
though we're half-collapsed by the rain we'll look 
more human for it, our faces clumsily papered— 
even though you're a real asshole, you'll glow. 
pastorals in the atrium 
the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
yes, that one. deal, i say. okay, how about 
the korean boy who walks past 
our house late at night, singing 
"moon river"? oh, you can use that, i say, 
i wouldn't even know what 
to do with it. but there is something else. 
i've been wanting to write about 
the black skirt we've been using to cover 
the lovebird's cage. the goodnight skirt. 
in exchange, i'll let you have 
our drunken mailman, the tailless tabby, 
and i'll throw in the broken grandfather clock 
we found in the forest. one more, she says. 
last night, i say. the whole night. 
she considers for a while, then, 
okay, that's fair. but i really had something going 
with that lovebird. all right, i say, write it 
anyway. if it's more beautiful than mine, 
it's yours. 
self storage 
at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
repose 
i've taken rest on a boulder in this clearing 
to finish thinking on it while the quiet's 
still hovering around me. i'm like a spring 
someone is flattening until it lies 
uncoiling on the ground, the tension light 
now pressure's been removed. i wanted rest 
but not this closure: things were piling up 
and i was full of them, and being pressed 
to take on more. i couldn't interrupt 
the constant flow of work because i'd slept 
poorly or the load was heavy: weren't 
we all carrying too much? the noise 
is what i miss—the shackle line's chain 
like glass bottles clinking after toil, 
the scald tank's clang amidst the seething boil 
was the sound of railway cars as couplings claimed 
them. always the drone of the main line, 
the slowly turning wheel and its rusted chain 
often mistaken for the hum in my mind. 
all i hear now is the cicada's whine 
and in its pauses a distant rush of cars 
climbing the hill to ancaster recedes, 
its mechanical dying like a far tide 
rolling from the solid land. maybe 
the spring's uncoiling is different than mine 
and i'm a red-breasted robin that's never 
left the latticework of limbs and leaves 
for the deepening dark sky and now is severed 
by consuming fire and a thick corrupting sleeve 
of bitter smoke, smoked out as though a beetle 
had emerged from dark wood thrown on a rising fire. 
pender and hamilton 
i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
little voice 
that morning in the motel 
where your best friend lived, 
new snow outside, at least in the memory 
and the stranger—he was eighteen, 
you were alone, she was downstairs 
at the pop machine or something 
while you watched the snow, the nest 
of beached antlers in the yard 
behind the pine trees and then he was there, too 
in the room, telling you about 
a guitar, or something useless 
and you thought 
empty room, you thought quiet house, 
you were a very smart girl and you felt 
the footstep he took one step closer behind you 
at the window, and from the rising star 
of your gut you heard it, like twin 
drops of water—you have to leave the room 
right. now. and quietly, and you did. 
that was smart. you were a smart 
girl, and you did not tell anyone 
not when they found out he was 
in her room at night, not 
when they sent him away, not 
until you were a grown woman, and what 
you wouldn't give 
for that little voice again, now. 
amygdala 
it names you gazelle and it calls 
lion. stomach churn and lung-hover, 
it reroutes the canal of your breath 
to quadriceps, large muscle clusters, 
the limbs you hold closer 
when the flowers arrive it says fire 
alarm. when the new lover or victim 
sits in the front row it says brimstone 
and it says yes to tequila and yes 
to shaking, always, knees and hands, 
under the arm of another woman it will name 
safety, it says go home with her, you must 
go home, avoid the tall grass and public 
places, the darkened lot, the stampede 
of small crowds and also solitude, go home, 
the amygdala says this 
is the savannah and you, 
a gazelle. 
anniversary 
it has taken five years and fifteen hundred 
kilometres to get away, and closer 
to the mountains. i can see them— 
every day, like i always wanted. near, 
and distant. every day i can ask people 
not to touch me— 
on the bus, on the beach, or in my new kitchen. 
or, i could ask them to— 
which, lately, is harder. how can it still 
feel so soon? she has never been 
near this new body of mine— 
short-haired, tattooed, very strong 
and very, very fast, now. i carry a chunk of rose 
quartz the size of my thumb for safety. 
i have sworn to myself a life of people 
who know when to stop. i promised— 
and spent my first night in the new apartment drawing 
circles in salt and rain, whispering 
to my old self, come here. i built this 
for you. i promised. 
there must be a name for this 
how to feel like how you imagined the city? a blur of light steps out of a cab. 
stem of a glass in a ring on a wet table. slink, slink. would it have been better 
if you had moved into that little beehive level with the skytrain, whoosh all 
day, glow all night, little hexagram. one stool, one door, two windows at an 
angle with the tracks, tracks, track. two windows! rattle rattle goodnight all 
day. you imagined glass and water, heels and click, the film of alcohol across 
everything, city city. little dots of light, little swipes. a secret: vancouver 
is actually a series of small caves, mould like a dust of sugar powder, did 
you know? saturday night aesthetic: the chevron station for yachts in coal 
harbour, hovered out in the water, glossy black, little ring, orange light. how 
long did it take me to realize the white-hot squares at the top of downtown are 
penthouses? how long did it take me to realize those very regular fireworks 
are private planes? why can't i have, why can't i have, why can't i? what if 
we just kept living together, what if i just tried harder, what if i had moved 
to toronto? all the women in this city say i love you, they say centered, we 
say seawall, we go home and murmur toronto toronto seattle toronto in our 
sleep. you don't understand. i have an obligation to a girl in a barn, to a girl 
in a car, to a girl in the forest; she says get me out of here, she says my own 
apartment. is it possible to be dissociated not from me but the city. like here 
i am arms and legs, here i am oh new york. 
terra nova, terraformed 
spent shale, thigh haptic fisher, roe, river 
delta of sleep-inducing peptides abet our tent 
in a deep time course, in venus retrograde 
we coalesced into the cartesian floral pattern 
of heritage where i hunt along a creek as 
you pack bits of bone away within a system 
of conservation the site was discovered 
during construction of a new venous 
highway for stars birthing themselves 
out of pyroclastic dust and telepathy 
in the time zone of some desperate hour 
when all our exits are terraformed 
sons and daughters of the liberal arts 
all my life has spurned a desire for more than 
a power line of injured transistors 
fetal alcohol syndrome, oil drums sunk 
to the bottom of every lake, the aurora borealis 
an overdose along the magnetized pole 
what we are offered in lieu of a soul 
another paper cut of lambent plasma 
thickening the wound bed of release: 
o creek, bleeding hills, census inveterate 
let me sleep five more minutes just five 
minutes more before we default on 
eternity 
look book 
over there on the green 
lawn under a sick pine 
is the body of the bird 
his plumage blue when 
i go to look at him and 
wonder if he's dead but 
his chest sort of heaves 
so i bend down closer 
look how the breast 
of the bird splits open 
and a fist of maggots 
spills out on the grass 
a necklace of sticky 
pearls in peristalsis ribbed 
and shining in the july 
light invertebrates that 
form an anecdote before 
i go back into our clapboard 
house to look at the sears 
catalogue and dream 
i am a girl posed into 
happiness look at me 
here now in this new 
dress i've bought with my 
own money at age twenty 
in the city when the cops 
question me i flash my 
passport thinking of 
lichen inching down 
a branch of a tree over 
the town river when i was 
small and somewhere my 
birth father is drunk and 
homeless, half-mad when 
the cops ask for his name 
he'll say, december 
beauty 
beauty is my irreparable and today i became geometric. 
a faux linear figure that distills a skip trace of first principles. 
in a whiteout of atlantic snow banging stars into the femoral 
vein of euclid while rows of lavender circuits, all porous, 
surrounded me. i genuflected before the hospital parking 
of my father's jaundice, for i am a good daughter of the colony. 
the colony which begot the immortal heart of the markets. 
resource nursed all young bucks of the florets, a liquidity 
i should service or else receive a lesser dessert. with my smudge 
cleanse at the ready i find myself dispensing with the usual 
future haunt of stability; a survival signaling my relationship 
to time, or i'm out of it, entirely. chanting hell as hair veils 
my face as if this is a western. come polygon and i circumvent 
the disaster, do not disturb my circles. holy i went, holy 
all around my head, the holy i am went careening down 
the back stairs of this low-rise rental. striated by the pinnacle 
light of this city that has my blood pooled purple at the center 
of its gravity. you can scan the ground from overhead for death 
pits. i read this on the internet when i was dehydrated, lonely, 
and afraid. office plants all broad-leafed repositories 
for cognition's patent heart. i've gone and been abominable. 
a column extended from the top of my head into heaven. 
at the edges of my system an anishinabek or indo-european 
projection of words my nerves could translate into the crawl 
space of animal magnetism. white pine verticals send us up 
as a stomach pumped by filial love. oh, inconsequent curb 
of my street i refuse to kneel, this day like any other, a cousin 
charged with trafficking. still waiting to be ordained, i make 
mask of our features that are retreating. plush pockets of rust 
about another falsehood of water, a creek that pleats. i've gone 
and got a blister. that summer a black bear's muzzle was coated 
in shellac from the aerosol can she bit through on my mother's 
porch. a half-century after my grandmother's mother said, 
don't ever shoot a black bear, they are my people. so i continue 
to speak more than this mortuary sunrise where i am only just alive. 
bozo, today is over. 
a wake 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to explain this place you've returned to from above; 
cedar along a broken shore, twisting in a wake of fog. 
i've lived in rooms with others, of no place and no mind 
trying to bind a self inside the contagion of words while 
your eyes open the night's slow static. at a loss 
to understand all that i cannot say, as if you came 
upon the infinite simply by thinking and it was 
a shore of broken cedar twisting in a wake of fog. 
if i moan from an animal throat it is in hope you 
will return to me what i lost learning to speak. 
your eyes open the night's slow static at a loss 
to ever know the true terminus of doubt, the limits of skin. 
as long as you hold me i am doubled from without and within: 
a wake of fog unbroken, a shore of twisted cedar. 
i will press myself into potential, into your breath, 
and maybe what was lost will return in sleep once i see 
your eyes open into the night's slow static, at a loss. 
broken on a shore of cedar. we twist in a wake of fog. 
self-portrait cemetery 
there was no precedent 
just a headache, despair, three 
cans of asahi plastic-bagged and 
there they were: 
most punched into the earth like 
square stud earrings, 
the rest pushed out, erect, 
fake flowers at their base the most 
colourful pubic hair. 
one grave said lagos, nigeria so i stood 
by it clasping the beer with the full stretch 
of my hand. 
i was the only live body around. 
they moved my friends 
into the chicken coop. 
and where are the chickens? 
i wished the lambs a pasture the size of the donkeys'. 
and i wished for the donkeys— 
i wished something very large for the donkeys. 
i am a donkey. 
there was ginger ale, coke zero, 
and mexican beer 
on the small cart of the small donkey. 
the large and 
heavy head of a 
donkey 
covered in several burlap sacks. 
nausicaa 
she remembers only her dreaming. refashions herself 
in the morning as if sleep has removed a piece of her, 
changed and replaced it before she woke. i, too, am at 
her knees, have been for some time now, but not as 
part of the dream. she cannot see me lying waterlogged 
on the sand in front of her; steps on my hand and 
walks by. it doesn't matter what i am. there is a certain 
pleasure in that. 
killarnoe 
killarnoe is a place i invented right 
now. i just built it from my head. i started 
with a letter k and set down the letters 
that spilled out. what does that say when k-i-l-l 
first sprouts? something repressed, or 
an instinct, that when allowed a moment's 
free reign, opens to its own mind 
and speaks bluntly? but see how i persisted 
past the first impulse to slash at the page's 
clean white throat, and instead adorned it 
with a pretty vowel, gently drawing out the ells 
to sulk the k down into a rumbled, 
grudging argument against the mind's knee- 
jerk proposal, the oh opening to compromise, 
and a silent e watching without judgement. 
killarnoe, i decide, is the land 
of our ancient people. 
ah 
an open moment, 
a prolonging 
of notice 
without reaction, a downward 
fountain of data, filling. 
unclosing, throat's 
wholeness, wide, 
to swallow 
the thrall of all of it: 
full bulge of gulp 
held— 
nothing undulating, no 
void vacuum 
pursuing a present cud 
through 
a human tunnel. 
sustained hum, 
sustenance 
pouring, not pulsing. 
rinse without erosion, 
flush without the closed 
push of peristalsis. 
clarity 
not needing blur 
to know itself. 
armadillo 
my lover spent his summer in the south, 
carving armadillos from their husks. it was, to hear him 
say it, an experience—the term people save 
for the places they hate. he spent june in the sunroom 
with a pitcher of sweet tea and a picture of me. 
by august, just the tea, watching hicks 
suck cigarettes through long, aristocratic 
sticks, papaya seeds stuck between their burnt 
sienna teeth. everything was burnt there. my lover 
carved years off his life with the very same knife 
the armadillos learned to fear. where are they 
now, i asked him as snowfall took care 
of the candles i'd lit. the not-quite-rodents, the not-quite-reptiles, 
not-quite-right gatecrashers of the ark? 
how does their nudity suit them? do they sigh 
all cool, how we sighed last year, when we threw our anoraks 
off and found we had that chalet to ourselves? 
if we were ever blameless, it was then. i held your locks 
in a chinese bun as you went south indeed, 
throwing, upon my balls, your tongue, how sea urchins 
throw their stomachs upon the coral reefs they eat. 
at which point my lover raised his knife 
to my hairline, scalped me masterfully and poured, 
into my open brain, a tea so cold and sweet. 
i am in love with your brother 
richie made me promise not to relate any stories of 
embarrassment or crime, but, richie, on 
this, the evening of your nuptials, i must tell them about 
our long day in truro. i just must. the fallacy then 
was a dark twin of tonight's fallacy, we 
and the dogs—who are thought to be clairvoyant 
on these matters—anticipated storms 
that never came, and here we are now, beneath 
a tarpaulin, on an evening they reported 
would be clear and ideal for regattas. 
as truro woke, as truro's rodents spat their 
morning songs, richie came across my notebook, open 
to its core, and spotted my little admission: 
i am in love with your brother. 
the first line, i insisted, of a song i'd been arranging 
to be played on the wurlitzer, though now i 
come clean, richie, while your soul is at its smoothest 
and most forgiving, i did love him, the crimson acne 
flecked across his neck, he was like a man 
a guillotine had made an attempt at. 
we rolled that whole notebook into joints, didn't we, 
richie, then drove into the boonies to shove ammo 
into rifles folk left above their porch doors. 
that summer, your brother's motorboat 
slipped into the irish sea, his mannequin body 
demolished, and i'll bet he is here now, and is 
glad, i am sure of this. caroline, richie 
is one hell of a guy. you would do best to keep 
his body firmly in yours, how seas contain boats, 
for he is only stories to me now. 
the masturbating flowers 
ignore me—i am frail today. 
if i tell you to stop 
walking, keep walking. if i ask 
for a piece of your nectarine, 
or press your palm 
against my chest, where the ribs sink 
most, where your come, months 
ago, would collect and grow cold, 
keep walking. all around us, 
library books used to wilt and expire, 
and if we were outside, 
the masturbating flowers 
would bite their filthy lips. 
sitting in the narrow shadow 
of an infantile willow, 
with a paperback, and a highlighter 
to mark the words 
we wanted in our lives forever. 
the penultimate embrace, abbreviated 
by such factors as the arrival 
of the streetcar and the heterosexual gaze. 
the ultimate, unabbreviated: a decadence 
of unclean teeth. i've since begun flossing. 
there's blood sometimes so oral 
has been taken off the table. 
a raw gum is a head wound, like any 
other, a door a blight loves the sight of. 
it gets men all choleric, though. 
in the yellow light, with their yellow feet, 
they push my body away. 
the pinata 
they came to strike the pinata. 
the piñata hung from a crane 
and swayed, its swollen gut 
of newspaper and paste. 
they listened as the piñata creaked, 
a dock in choppy waters. 
they began to shout themselves to the brink. 
and standing there, watching the piñata, 
it seemed almost possible 
to forget the search that had continued 
since christmas, was it this one 
or the one before? 
parks, rivers, cupboards, drawers, 
the bent light beneath their decks— 
what had they found? 
and standing there, the piñata swaying, 
they were gathered and ready 
with hammers, bats, knives and chains 
to smash and tear until the piñata's shanks 
could be nipped by dogs. 
though when the first seam split, 
some resorted to doubling over 
and pawing the grass. 
while others continued taking swings, 
the halved ones moved with new insistence, 
their hands sweeping over the ground 
like visible winds. 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the field that stretched beyond 
goalposts. the field that redrew 
lines in us. 
like the field in a glove save. 
a high-five. the field in a radio hit, 
its raised seating. 
or, the field in waiting. the field in hunger. 
the field in a fifth beer, a wrong turn, 
the field in the little scar 
on your neighbour's forehead. 
the field in every abandoned thing 
we found in that field. in every bent putter. 
torn jacket. set of keys. 
the field in forgetting. in debt. 
the internet 
i first heard about it in a burger king. 
its aims seemed as elusive as the stock ticker 
or why some people stayed in marriages. 
the future was flying cars, phone screens, and minidisc. 
i bused tables with a cloth that mucked the laminate sheen 
and, just that spring, an annular eclipse ringed the sky 
like we were suddenly looking down a cabled conduit. 
then, as if an indigenous strain moving beyond a range map, 
people started getting it, birdsong calling up from basements, 
the pink noise, hiss, and crackle of a connection made. 
and somebody already had some pictures: the body, 
pixelated, bare, with the feeling you were overseeing it, 
moving along the conveyer belt of banner ads. 
days went by like they were being dragged into a bin. 
somewhere, fibers tethered us to a warehouse or a factory, 
but for then the feed seemed as ephemeral as a thought. 
the search bar like a mail slot you could lift 
just enough to see inside somebody else's space. 
it wasn't a place, but you could go there. 
at night, blinds down, but windows open, flags of light 
were quietly raised from main floors up into our rooms. 
foley artist 
this is the sound i was trying to make: 
in the film in the film, they're shooting a big-budget prequel to jaws, 
but the rubber shark heads are being eaten by a real-life shark. 
the sound of the rubber pieces being chewed— 
not easy, but i'd done harder and worse. 
which makes me think. i knew a boy named kevin 
when i was too young to know the difference 
between rubber and real, though rubber is real, 
and kevin knew a place to hide in the valley so good 
that no one ever found him though he kept appearing 
startling people in their sliding doors. he was locked in the glass 
as if he'd done something so sinister his punishment 
needed flair to amuse the ones who'd been wronged. 
once, though, someone snapped a photo 
and swore it was kevin there, watching—we all knew 
it was bunk, the person knew too, but then we started 
talking about it: do you remember that time 
i stuck a pin in his waterbed for no reason really 
or the time he got dressed up as his mother but not in her clothes? 
we retrieved the old albums, unpacked the taped boxes, 
found the one botched life-sized drawing 
he'd done of himself and completed it 
together as a neighbourhood, a district, a city, 
practically a nation at this point, and then a sort of galaxy 
expanding outward at a speed so great that when kevin 
walked out of the picture with a boom 
it almost wasn't a surprise, so fast were we moving… 
but kevin was back, and he shook our hands, 
revealed the crevice he'd made in the dirt 
and told everyone sorry for pulling this stunt. 
and then he lived his long life. he married, 
had children, difficult years, divorced, rebuilt— 
and double back to the start again on this slight tilt: 
in the film in the film they don't need to add any sounds 
to the mix because the shark that swims in and chews up 
all our likenesses is already perfectly captured. 
voodoo hypothesis 
before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
keepers of paradise 
this is a hand that intends to do its maker harm. 
this is the clock turned back five hundred years. 
the river that runs from eden mouth 
to rare unsweetened mouth. 
i've logged the sour dawns of all 
my quiet into this body, 
its crisis of fleeing nowhere when nowhere is home. 
and reborn half-bled in our nighttime 
diverging their sullen brethren, their patterns of vapour, 
rain, shadows on goat-eaten planes 
in the morse events of smallest things 
in my new metropolis away. 
i am a simple child, then, a tilled site of history. 
call me isobar. distraction in place of earth. 
call me tropical depression 
where i regale to the world its problem of beaten pines, 
pleading rivers returning thorns to their abducted bush. 
i'd offer the wound night shuts behind my eyes— 
but enough. hear morne d'or divinize her song. 
give these coon keepers of paradise a liminal eavesdrop. 
hear ghostly algorithms translate these nights to bloom. 
don draper 
moths feather your far gazebo 
like young sailors on first leave. 
you know something, and keep reminding me 
of my own needs. you see an audience 
of blooming heads and sugared bank notes, 
and act accordingly. the swallows see it at five o'clock, 
a wolfman's tragedy. 
they hang themselves upside down, 
handsome sienna prizes in the semaphore of bats. 
swayed by a summer night, i swing out 
to your silk pocket square standing at attention, 
a bird about-face. you're the dark dew on the green grass of home. 
poseurs 
the walking stick insect was a late childhood horror, 
ugly as an umbrella's disrobing. 
moths, with brown wings the prize of 
asian fan-makers, pestered it like paparazzi. 
that peruvian variety, a race almost entirely female, 
would come down from the morello cherry long after sunset; 
after the plums turned the humid blue they want to be, 
after trees sighed and inhaled the nearby jasmine, blooming 
them nightly to dream-lives as smooth-complected date palms 
for some caliph's odalisque 
or the low-stress oregonian monkey puzzles, 
a species whose softly-prickled, rounded shoehorn limbs 
propose new kinds of orgasm. 
walking stick insects 
were squibs from the natural world, 
little stand-up comics 
fashioned after mutineered twigs. given half a chance, 
the poseurs would neither walk, nor meander, 
perambulate, or otherwise imitate 
wordsworth or nietzsche. like the wives of 17th century 
men of garden science, they loitered and lolled 
between vivarium and cabinet of curiosity, 
dividing their time between joy and sloth. 
stranger 
a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
in their party dresses, all yelling, "don't run! don't run!" 
laughing and looking like they were having 
the time of their lives. i noticed one girl 
near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
for no other reason than itself. lost now too, 
sitting in 14b in pashmina and dark glasses, 
i might as well be the smyrna merchant. 
i've never been good at small talk; 
besides which, we'll be in new york in about an hour. 
later that night, i remembered the way she laughed 
as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
was the first thing i saw when i woke. it seems now 
she'd shown me what had come to me once 
and was now gone. travelling from montréal over a month ago, 
i can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
they didn't admit the syrian poet scheduled 
to lecture at nyu two days before. i small-talked 
the homeland security officer about his upcoming trip 
to guelph, ontario, where his wife's from. 
love, another poet once claimed, 
could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
what's been lost, and what i understood was 
that the vase, if put back together, 
becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
we might lose again, and so we do. 
i don't stick to the facts— 
what if i wrote lines that took nothing 
but the shape of my thoughts? 
no irritable reaching for an old story, 
no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
a rail bridge connects the old playground 
to the abandoned car lot—i say that knowing 
i don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
is that poetic license? it's not something i need to know, 
this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
the sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the hudson. 
they call it stranger's weather. 
i rather think i did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
i asked too—not about a better view; 
about someone entirely different, about what remains 
after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel. 
appetites 
you wake hearing the girl next door come in at two a.m. 
in the event that it's a ghost, it's telling you 
not to waste time in bed 
worrying. 
you should be sleeping, or doing 
anything else. 
you haven't yet seen the faun, the red fox, 
or the rabbit. 
the statue of a woman in the lily-padded lake is waist-deep, 
a mimicry of diana's animal life, suspicious of sleep. 
with her in mind, you're troubled even thinking of things 
that don't frighten you. 
but this, too, is a waste of time and talent. 
there is good slumber 
to be sought in the rush of ruminations outside yourself: 
in listlessness of reeds on the dead embankment, 
in languor of bee by a late marigold 
or duck feathers gathering in a corner of falling 
water. 
you realize you haven't organized your life. 
you've forgotten yourself entirely. 
you wake up and try to pick up the thread. 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
mouth open, she looked as though she was protesting 
her inclusion. i brought her to a place 
where no one speaks. there's been a mistake, 
she said with the soft folds 
of her tracksuit, the car keys 
she held like a set of brass knuckles. 
you can't take me anywhere i don't wish to go. 
i did have to drive out of town to take this picture. 
as evidence, it was the next day's news. 
now it's so obvious, her clavicle's hard line, 
the shadow there, a hollow big enough for two thumbs. 
skipping stones 
i fling flat stones into the surf, corral 
my anger in the strangely angled pose. 
each beat's concentric blip a sound so odd 
it clarifies the brine to mellow blues. 
my mother's ex once skimmed his bottle caps 
down at the lake; not littering, i thought, 
the glinting disc's fourteen discrete hop-hops. 
now i trust black, the solid strength of rock. 
my hand must learn the pebble's weight, and know 
which chips will change the shape and spoil the trick; 
this can't be accurately guessed, and though 
some seem to work without my gauging it; 
i fling them to new ocean bottom homes, 
and some i leave to dry upon the beach. skip stones. 
party music 
in '68 a great conductor came 
to one small european town. his flat 
was right above our gran's. he reeked of fame, 
wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
a coat in astrakhan. a man like that 
deserved the name of meister. appetite 
for drama and excitement won at last; 
we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
the aura of an enigmatic past 
(unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
of swissness. we could only speculate; 
he was a mighty river with no source. 
but we had watched him leave the building late: 
a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
had scooped him up, a russian at his side. 
an undernourished blonde in mink. of course. 
what more could any human being provide? 
we had it figured out. we knew this man 
was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
salvation for the suffering of gran, 
whose patience was as solid as the stones 
on via maestra. so we made a plan, 
imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
notified (a buzz between two phones), 
down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
although our minds had not digested sex, 
we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
he'd ring the bell, come in for tea. the next 
instalment of our hot imaginings: 
her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
(insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
his man-purse chucked aside! like mighty wings 
those sideburns swooped on in. oh, great abyss 
she toppled into, blown by some gust 
of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
all this for romance in the upper crust, 
a man above domestic life's dull take, 
a mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
party member, the phrase of cold 
and adult truth was just one part left out 
of what the two of us were later told. 
it wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
for party used to mean the happy mess, 
the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
but now we heard the coda of distress: 
the rattle of a door against a chair, 
the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
no nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
the strains of the horst wessel lied instead. 
because, of course, the party wasn't ours. 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
they all had names like jennifer or lynne 
or katherine; they all had bone-blonde hair, 
that wet, flat cut with bangs. they pulled your chair 
from underneath you, shoved their small fists in 
your face. too soon, you knew it would begin, 
those minkish teeth like shrapnel in the air, 
the bacchic taunts, the herculean dare, 
their soccer cleats against your porcine shin, 
that laugh, which sounded like a hundred birds 
escaping from a gunshot through the reeds— 
and now you have to face it all again: 
the joyful freckled faces lost for words 
in supermarkets, as those red hands squeeze 
your own. it's been so long! they say. amen. 
radio 
the kitchen dark, the summer night air warm, 
and my father at the kitchen table, radio 
turned down low, alone, listening to baseball. 
my mother and i come inside from our swim, 
toweling off. the crowd is restless. long silences 
between pitches in the play-by-play. 
look how he holds the radio in both hands 
like a steering wheel, thumb on the tuning dial 
to catch the wavering channel, fighting static. 
his eyes glitter like a field of fireflies. 
prague 
someone had left a mannequin in the street. 
it was wearing a wedding dress 
and—but no, 
it was a woman, standing on a box. 
a small crowd had gathered around her 
and her eyes were closed. 
i hesitated. then 
reached down to the jar at her feet 
as if i were bending to pet a stranger's dog. 
and as though i had deposited a soul, chink, 
her eyelids fluttered open, 
her fingers flickered, 
she awoke like hermione 
astonishing her husband 
in the miraculous final scene of the winter's tale. 
later, through the window of a restaurant, 
i saw her dash across a crowded street, 
clutching her skirts to keep them from the rain. 
redbird 
it's the middle of the night. 
i've set the house on fire 
with those matches i love, 
the ones in the kitchen 
with the red bird on the box. 
you can strike them anywhere. 
allumettes qui s'allument partout. 
take care: may ignite if box is 
dropped, shaken, or crushed. 
this same bird flies through 
a tattoo on your arm. 
the house is burning down 
and i am thinking of boats. 
you hate the matches, the smell 
of bent, black spoons. 
i light one and it falls to the floor. 
another and another. take care. 
i don't know what to save 
from this place, sailing from wall 
to wall, room to room, smoking. 
you are not here. you are rain 
battering against some window. 
i don't know what to save. 
the red bird eats everything in sight. 
snake handler 
no tricks, 
i just love them 
as my own blood 
and keep my eyes 
on the ceiling. 
o brothers, i sing, 
your bodies are thick 
as wrists, your skins 
my only book. 
i relieve them 
of poison, 
i undo what they do. 
i'm charcoal and paper. 
touch me: i leave 
a mark on your hand. 
this is just costume, 
my depression dress, 
my buckled shoe. 
tin flowers in my ears 
play spiral-groove blues. 
song of the last shaker 
one line, 
two line, 
three line, 
plane. 
i skate across the lake on a bone-made blade. 
my spine is an arrow, a leg of his chair. 
my nose straight and narrow and long 
as my hair. 
my body's for bruising. 
my heart is her sky. 
i train my breath 
upwards. 
i practice. 
i die. 
the trouble with wormholes 
how many times must i learn the lesson of compression? 
let go of everything you know and start from scratch. 
one friend performing backbends on a beach while another 
snaps his tibia on an icy patch of saskatchewan. i don't think 
i'm suffering, my days a series of unexpected gifts punctuated 
by a blast of the family rage shot deep into my soft plexus. 
it occurs to me i don't have to be so many people. if you're staying 
alive spinning stories, it's suddenly a skill that you talk too much. 
i'm not sure it's smart to unlock the portal. the reformed raver 
claimed he saw my inner wheels spin. red cloud, are there wars 
where you are? your great-great-grandson appeared on democracy 
now! with a plan. will my generation be remembered for anything 
i haven't forgotten? they mine the hills for gold, they mine the hills 
for uranium, and all around the world, columns are cracking. 
i've watched you soar all day. please teach me how you do that. 
good day villanelle 
you ran naked out the door. 
the neighbours laughed; i chased you down. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i know you're busy. 
did i tell you when you were little how 
you ran naked out the door? 
you got halfway down the street 
before i caught you in my arms. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i think i told you this before: 
i was giving you a bath and then 
you ran naked out the door. 
it happened fast. 
the neighbours laughed. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
you have to watch a baby close. 
i remember once— 
you ran naked out the door. 
i hardly see you anymore. 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
i do not think that i could love a human being; i would not 
know it if i squeezed too hard. i would be a great bear. i would 
go rumbling through. 
i would try to eat you. i would stand alone, 
in the quiet centre of you, and roar. no, i 
could not love you. i could not 
love a human being. 
i would get so 
stuck on things. the small 
flaws in you, like 
the way that you will die; 
it would stick in my throat, i could not love you. 
and the way that, if you touched me, i would be 
as if to you a solid object, 
as if a boot, a stick, a stone. 
and you to me. the way that i could 
pick you up. that i could 
hammer you against me; that i could 
bruise myself on you, and still have only a 
brief impression of you left there on my skin. 
and, if i cried, that too would be 
an imitation of the thing that i would feel. 
and the pain itself, if it were real, would come as if 
so separately from you that it might 
equally have been a whip, a rope, 
a rail with which i thrashed myself when i 
thrashed myself with you. 
no, i could not love a human being if they 
could not leave a mark. 
even if i were a bear 
and i ate you, you would 
move right through me. 
even if you were a bear 
and you ate me, i would 
move right through you. 
but i am not a bear. and will not eat you. 
if i said i could, i could not. 
and you are not a bear. and will not eat me. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
and that is why i could not love you. 
materials 
growing up, i 
did not have books 
the only reading material 
there was 
were old newspapers laid out 
on the floor 
to dry 
our winter boots 
or wrap 
things of glass 
when i learned to read, 
the winter boots 
lay dripping 
in the hallway; 
the glass, broken 
and uncovered 
because i knew this 
this 
would be my way in 
at the farm 
i was sitting in the car counting the black flies 
they had come in through the open window 
there were four 
one was on the rear-view mirror 
the other three were perched on my left hand 
i heard a gunshot by the barn and thought nothing of it 
we were at a farm 
i saw a cow come charging forward with its head half gone 
a man with an axe came running behind it 
he hit it once 
once he hit it 
and it fell to the ground 
everything was eaten 
its eye appeared in a soup that night 
everything accounted for 
bare 
it means you are light, that you can begin differently now, that you've taken it 
all off 
it means to show your tooth and claw, without the work, the polish, the 
appointment 
if the ending were different, if you placed the last letter right after the 
beginning, it would be an animal, a power, a warning from which to stay away 
face to face, maybe you'd see they're really not all that different, both just 
trying 
a rearrangement, a shift, a move out of place, a spine realigned 
but it would take that wouldn't it? that face to face, to know 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
i should have propped something else beside it— 
an empty can, or the last half of my sandwich. 
as it stands, the cricket's size grows in the telling, 
spreads like the news, years ago, of abandoned stacks 
of dirty magazines stowed at the creek behind 
the street where i grew up. when my bicycle tires 
edged over the lip, boys were already clutching the rain- 
soaked pages in their fists, the ink of my first 
glimpses of flesh were already starting to pale, 
to bleed into the leaves. seriously, we'd say 
in the schoolyard, it was the coolest. later, actual 
clothing would melt off actual flesh; yes, melt, 
not just fall to the floor, because, seriously, she 
was the hottest. then gossip flares up in the yard's 
kindled corners. when she finally calls up, crying, 
i don't relay how her how could yous clutched 
at my throat, pinned me to the receiver, silent, ashamed, 
because i knew i'd been the worst. 
then what? i left, took a few bum jobs 
humping rich peoples' luggage, spent two years 
in seoul, korea, navigating through crowds 
where, for the first time, i was the tallest, 
so i stuck out to this gorgeous backpacker 
who speaks fluent italian, recites whole blocks 
of the inferno aloud, and moved in with her 
as soon as i came home, because, seriously, 
it felt like the real thing. though i'm no longer sure 
"real" is the right word, because it's years on, 
and i'm no longer sure of this house, or this town, 
or my job, and with her, lately, well let's just say 
this stretch has been tough. so i stuff the last three 
cans of a six-pack, a camera, and a sandwich 
into a knapsack, set out to hike along a creek 
where leaves brushing against my bare forearms 
still feel erotic. rambling, i turn this corner to find 
there, on a bare patch of dirt, the world's biggest cricket, 
this freakishly massive thing, and clutch at my mouth 
as the air fills with the orchestral swell of its legs, 
and gather myself enough to snap a single photo 
before it leaps so high i think it must be heading 
into someone else's life. shit, i whisper further on, 
realizing my shot on the bare patch will show nothing 
of its largeness. hear myself having to try to explain, 
struggling, because it was amazing, and, seriously, 
i've never been able to help myself. one way or another, 
i will have to try to tell her every single thing. 
earworm 
so there's likely a more accurate name 
for the glow of a deer's eyes in the dark. 
for the hunger that drew a python in florida 
to swallow an alligator whole. for the aura, 
the swell just before the gut burst. 
for why you've been staying up late at night 
on a search engine, looking for all of the possible 
names for a lump at the back of your nostril. 
for the name of that girl who sold you a pill 
from the basket of her bike, and rode off while 
her fairy wings flapped in the breeze. and a name 
for that breeze. repetune, ohrwurm, 
the last song stuck in your head 
which became something else. and for what else? 
for not being able to say the one thing 
that might have kept you from continually falling apart. 
for discovering late. for replaying the video clip 
of joltin' joe carter's ninth-inning blast 
in the '93 series. for the sound when the ball 
hit the bat, and everyone knew they'd won 
before it left the park. and for the white noise 
that isn't white noise, but a poor translation of what 
the blood tries to say. and what the blood tries to say. 
for the feeling of never wanting to leave the party 
and then having to leave. for the ache in your legs 
when you should have cabbed home, but decided to walk 
and the walk was too far. but you had to keep on— 
earworm, little one, chugging along, traveling towards a name. 
mayor snow 
the mayor's accountant was as humourless 
as a glass of snow. 
a glass of snow was on the lawn. 
the tongues of the deer 
are the tongues of the gods 
according to local legend. 
the deer, growing brave, 
dipped their little tongues into the glass 
while the mayor's accountant 
holidayed with his shame. 
he put a gun to his mouth 
as the sun shone in boca raton. 
snowfall continued at home. 
the mayor's spiel was the same. 
the walls 
we cannot act until we have all the facts. 
we will never have all the facts. we act. 
we expand the wall. we found others. 
they are living breathing streets, walls 
are. this fact arouses us to erect wall 
after wall. we think only of the walls. 
we think of the walls as stitches 
in a blown apart body. the stitches 
bring this body back together. the walls, 
embracing the globe, will do the same 
for us. if not, we will work until every 
body is walled off from every other 
body. think of the thrill we'll feel 
when we tear down those walls, excited 
by the sudden wall of bodies or the joy 
of building all those walls anew. 
through the restaurant window 
i can see from where i sit 
a freight train going by, rolling forward 
in the dark. i can't tell if it's one long train 
or a dozen—i close my eyes, listen. 
a freight train going by, rolling forward 
as our conversation backs up, bridges one gap 
or a dozen. i close my eyes, listen. 
there are gates within us, you say, 
as our conversation backs up, bridges a gap. 
you reach across the table, take my hand. 
there are gates within us, you say 
again. you're right, there's always a distance. 
you reach across the table, take my hand 
in the dark. i can't tell if it's one long train. 
again, you're right, there's always a distance. 
i can see from where i sit. 
we bought a little city 
first, we remove the dreadful yellow awnings from the shop-fronts in the square. 
brighten the streetlamps. play our instruments for the dairy cows crowding 
the fence. we angle for more daylight, fill out the appropriate paperwork. get 
down on hands and knees to clean out the ditches. we eat breaded fish for 
lunch, drink a cold beer, volunteer to play our part. no one complains of their 
dreams or dread. a mangy dog comes out of the forest covered in mud and 
stinking of deep time. belonging to the old owners, he wants nothing to do 
with us, knows we'll use him as a bridge: look, there he goes with a pheasant 
in his mouth. late october, the windows display ornamental gourds, tidy piles 
of leaves. evening in the forest, the eyes and mouths of jack-o-lanterns spark. 
a bark, a souvenir. way off the earth the moon muscles in, entirely invincible. 
self-portrait 
this cloud is designed 
to move like a cursor from one side of the room to the other 
this cloud is designed to float inside 
uncorrupted by weather 
this cloud is easy to capture 
and won't last forever 
the cloud exists without a wonder 
of what anyone thinks     we study 
the cloud to learn this indifference     little deadpan filibuster 
the cloud makes a sudden diagonal 
move to the corner 
the crowd fills the space 
attempts to mimic its very nature 
as if one (just by watching) might gain 
a foothold 
knowing "the end" placard 
is mounted in the not-so- 
distant future 
not saying 
fists in our sleeves, we reach our limit. no way 
past lake ontario, nothing else to do 
until you say the thing you need to say. 
sweeten it if you like. stir in a name. 
it's only talk and we've talked our heads to 
foam before, testing the limit in a way. 
like the last time our four feet inched partway 
over the city's ledge. lightheaded you 
started to say something you needed to say 
then started again, we could– we can fly one way. 
right over the lake. how you said it, as if we were two 
wild geese, no credit limit in the way. ain't no way, 
i said. way. no way. way. tonight at the lake 
your courage fails again. knuckles in your pits, you 
flap your arms and squawk. say what you're dying to say. 
of course, don't. we're getting carried away. 
we'll stay this side of lake ontario, clenched. nous 
sommes à la limite de l'amitié – find a way 
to translate. if you won't say, i won't say. 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
because it takes three hours and gives him the blues bad 
so not now, not now, later, he promises, then falls asleep 
on my couch, shrugging his upper lip like a horse. 
