in '68 a great conductor came 
to one small european town. his flat 
was right above our gran's. he reeked of fame, 
wore grey ostrich shoes, a beaver hat 
tipped on a sweep of hair now going white, 
a coat in astrakhan. a man like that 
deserved the name of meister. appetite 
for drama and excitement won at last; 
we wondered what he did, by day and night, 
the aura of an enigmatic past 
(unknown to us, small girls of six and eight) 
now flattened by the neutral atom blast 
of swissness. we could only speculate; 
he was a mighty river with no source. 
but we had watched him leave the building late: 
a sleigh pulled by a giant yellow horse 
had scooped him up, a russian at his side. 
an undernourished blonde in mink. of course. 
what more could any human being provide? 
we had it figured out. we knew this man 
was perfect for a widow, bona fide 
salvation for the suffering of gran, 
whose patience was as solid as the stones 
on via maestra. so we made a plan, 
imagined, in soft, out-of-focus tones, 
her breathless lurking near the fire stairs. 
notified (a buzz between two phones), 
down he'd slink to orchestrate affairs; 
although our minds had not digested sex, 
we grimly guessed what adults did in pairs. 
he'd ring the bell, come in for tea. the next 
instalment of our hot imaginings: 
her jewelled hands upon his goat-haired pecs, 
(insert a full accompaniment of strings) 
as preface to the cinematic kiss, 
his man-purse chucked aside! like mighty wings 
those sideburns swooped on in. oh, great abyss 
she toppled into, blown by some gust 
of sweet, forbidden philharmonic bliss. 
all this for romance in the upper crust, 
a man above domestic life's dull take, 
a mercury, to whom we pinned in trust 
the soft and sparkling trappings of a rake, 
all caviar and aftershave, the gold 
of damask curtains, opened by mistake. 
party member, the phrase of cold 
and adult truth was just one part left out 
of what the two of us were later told. 
it wasn't what we'd hoped to think about, 
for party used to mean the happy mess, 
the donkey tail, the streamers and the shout, 
the ripple of a silver satin dress, 
a belch of pink confetti in the air, 
but now we heard the coda of distress: 
the rattle of a door against a chair, 
the flutter of the bitter yellow stars 
that, long ago, three cousins had to wear. 
no nothing, whether sequin, crumb or shred, 
no fur, no silk, no balcony guitars, 
the strains of the horst wessel lied instead. 
because, of course, the party wasn't ours. 
