the tour has only started when 
i'm ambushed by that flat-lined verdigris i'd know even 
as a stumbling sleepwalker: landschap 
with tin river, cleaver of sodden pastures — 
marvelous for painters, 
says the docent, was the enormity 
of the sky, rarely cloudless, and she's already 
turning to an italian hillscape when i say wait! this is 
my bloodstream, as my finger makes brief 
unintended contact with the canvas, 
and then my voice an ambulance 
i tell her there should be a diagram 
to indicate the grazing motion, 
how the grinding molars of the holsteins 
make the river go — 
or else, self-portrait 
in the glassing-over eye 
of a stickleback in a jam jar, 
left too long in the sun — 
but now the river is across the room because 
the docent has ushered me toward an upholstered bench 
and is murmuring, sit, sit, i have here from the staff-room 
a coffee, here you are — 
and i'm making the gesture for 
no, those fields i ate and was made of 
live in me, uncloseable 
parentheses 
yes, 
i said. the wind 
lifted the word and blew it 
through the birches into smaller yesses 
that dispersed. 
hitched bicycle ride, my hands 
on your waist, soles skimming the road 
in the bends. 
what we wore will be one of those tellings 
that even a latent, erasing disease 
never steals. in tune like a robin and robin, a doorbell 
and creak of the stairs. 
say love is the ship coming in. 
say the grave eyes of the birch trees 
watched us go. how long 
had we stood on the pier? gulls squalled. 
we'd outgrown what we packed. 
windstorm 
the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
regeneration machine 
i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
by way of explanation 
you have this thing you can only explain 
by driving me out to the port at night 
to watch the towering cranes moving containers 
from ship to train. or we go skipping stones 
across the mirror of the lake, a ghost ship 
in a bottle of blue bombay gin by your side. 
i have this thing i can only explain to you 
by showing you a pile of computer hardware 
chucked into the ravine. we hike down there 
and blackberry vines grab our clothes as if to say, 
stop, wait, i want to tell you something too. 
you have an old photograph you keep in your 
bedside drawer. i have this song i learned 
on my guitar. by way of clarification, you send 
me a youtube video of a tornado filmed up close 
from a parked car. or a live-stream from a public 
camera whose view is obscured by red leaves. 
i cut you a key to this room, this door. 
there's this thing. a dictionary being consumed 
by fire. the two of us standing in front of a rothko 
until time starts again. a mixtape that is primarily 
about the clicks and hums between songs. what if 
we walk there instead of driving? what if we just drive 
without a destination? there's this thing i've always 
wanted to talk about with someone. now 
with you here, with you listening, with all 
the antennae raised, i no longer have to. 
the goodnight skirt 
permission to use that snowball 
you've been keeping in the freezer 
since 1998. for a poem? she asks. 
what else? i say. i'll trade you, she says 
for that thing your mom said 
at the park. what was it? 
"god, that mallard's being a real douchebag"? 
