i'm seen sometimes along old frank's peninsula 
road, there to tend my flocks, sheep 
and swine both. i love the little roads, though; 
cement or dirt, it doesn't matter. signs, 
private, don't come in. i would, unknown, 
if only the poor things knew i lived openly 
in dark and light alike. i like them thinking 
i am kept out, for when am i more near 
than when beneath the cool sheltering branch 
they bend forelegs beneath their pliant necks 
and rest their restless eyes? no matter 
if even i am shut out; i love to turn 
and look upon the placid valley road 
that climbs and falls though never breaking— 
the hills when distant seem to swell, until 
i can't believe i live within their shadow. 
all is nameless here. one side, grass flat 
to exposed stone, pale, chipped by the vast 
native wind or rain, the sharp rolling cry 
of lightning's strike, the creeping moss 
a swell of life to cover stone like people 
upon the earth. to the north the land 
falling away: a buckling fence, the snake's 
hole that runs beneath, flimsy wall 
for the rotting shack tilted toward sea, and, 
further on, the painted ships upon 
a painted ocean. be still, now, and look 
upon your work: you laid islands like stones 
and pulled their peaks toward the sky, a quiet 
line of sentries that keep the malaspina 
waters in ordered calm. the mist like incense 
ascending, flung to earth, ascending again, 
a gentle repetition under the white-capped 
spirit that watches and approves all. wait, 
pender, let your reveries cease; for one unknown is climbing your hill— 
he'll think you mad. i've heard another wanders 
here now, some old toolmaker, a scent 
of coolant marking him, or varsol, if 
the day is ending. let me try him. 
hello, fellow walker, stranger, friend: 
pleasant to rest a moment, catch one's breath 
after so steep a hill. the sun is dimming, 
and casts the slopes and growth, the water-glimmer 
and roads in stark relief, the best moment 
of the day. tell me, stranger, of the road 
you've travelled, of your land and work. 
a stranger in a strange land: all my life 
this saying teased a yearning within me, 
a hot enticement, like the lure of false 
women – the place i settled in was once 
so full of blood but now is cramped and stiff 
from lack of movement. every day the people 
continue, squirrelling the work away: 
in stoney creek the headless hogs will hang, 
eviscerated, bloodless, half a year. 
i lie, as we all do, to tell the truth— 
after a day the animal is cut 
to pieces: boned for hams, whiz-knifed 
for tenderloin, for good and tasty meat 
to sit uneaten. it's hard to think one's work 
useless, desolate, to put an end 
to effort now the need is past. ontario's 
distant shore is an emblem of its people: 
the beach's curve became a block of steel, 
a chart, division into lines, assembly 
of patterns – what use is freedom now? 
the people want to build, to can, to smelt 
and slaughter, to count the wheels and spigots 
rolling off the line, to pile them high. 
all the senseless work: to stand a dozen 
meandering hours cap-spinning shampoo or dumping glass for juice, or scooping sugar 
into churning vats for syrup, lifting rail 
and cutting it so trains could switch their tracks, 
all glassy-eyed tedium till i walked 
away from every job, what was it all for? 
to lightly kick a skid one idle minute, 
waiting, rare reprieve, while merriment 
is borne upon the wind like drifting snow 
to pierce my ear? unknown, and spread like jam, 
like a last attempt to save the spoiled fruit, 
to sweeten others' mouths? unfair: 
you caught me thinking, and i spoke too soon. 
my words were all complaint, and empty, artless. 
you, artless, a craftsman? surely not, 
to think our poverty wealth. mountain soil 
brings forth seed-bearing fir and pine 
cradled marsh-weed, moss upon the stone, 
indeed all life requires to creep about— 
do not confuse the verdant hill with moneyed 
ease. look closer at that down-slope shack, 
that bit of shredded fence that closes it in, 
unkept: but for the spreading green and view 
of sheltered waters they are poor as any, 
if poor is what you seek. not poor, i think, 
but living capably. it's wealth that's strange. 
i think it unnatural. 
unnatural? the word 
is nothing, spoken only to lift our image 
beyond its worth. we heft a hammer 
and call ourselves tool-users, as if the ant 
could carry nothing to the building site, 
the mounds like cities, or the chimpanzee used no stick to fish in trees for food. the ones that know: the world is what we know, 
our place in it. 
uncommon, then. 
wealth, 
uncommon? no: this hill presents a view 
of harbour, hills and mountain, a mottled pleasure 
for the eye too vast, imprecise. near warnock 
i stood upon a smaller hill, near a lot 
with little silver domes and flowers set 
in rows of pots – a deer considered the earth 
in silent rumination, still as a thinker 
with fist in mouth. her stillness not of thought 
or comfort: in the field of rich grass, fear, 
a sudden unity with sense. with twinning 
hooves she clomped away – as we all must. 
false to speak of reason, instinct: i watched 
intently as a spider spun its web, 
pulling and extending spindle-legs 
with thought, precision, tireless effort, caught 
in strangeness, as if watching women knit 
or men tie up rigging, intricate lives. 
an hour it mesmerized me with its work, 
then rested in complexity – mistake, 
for now its spindles radiate like fossil 
remains upon my book, life crushed from it 
for fear of poison. its labour desolate. 
i looked and thought, what difference is dying 
there, what odd thing passes? no odd thing: 
a body, organ of nerve, the world-finger 
sounding sorrow with this chord, or anger 
with that sharp, a man like me. an end to it— 
spider, deer, my mind will tend to add 
import to stillness, reverie. i meant 
the deer is heir to ease and plenty, even 
the spider with its fishing net cast in air 
knows little travail. 
