strong and slippery, built for the midnight grass-party confronted by four cats, 
he sleeps his time away—the detached first claw on his foreleg which corresponds 
to the thumb, retracted to its tip; the small tuft of fronds 
or katydid legs above each eye, still numbering the units in each group; 
the shadbones regularly set about his mouth, to droop or rise 
in unison like the porcupine’s quills—motionless. he lets himself be flat- 
tened out by gravity, as it were a piece of seaweed tamed and weakened by 
exposure to the sun; compelled when extended, to lie 
stationary. sleep is the result of his delusion that one must do as 
well as one can for oneself; sleep—epitome of what is to 
him as to the average person, the end of life. demonstrate on him how 
the lady caught the dangerous southern snake, placing a forked stick on either 
side of its innocuous neck; one need not try to stir 
him up; his prune shaped head and alligator eyes are not a party to the 
joke. lifted and handled, he may be dangled like an eel or set 
up on the forearm like a mouse; his eyes bisected by pupils of a pin’s 
width, are flickeringly exhibited, then covered up. may be? i should say, 
might have been; when he has been got the better of in a 
dream—as in a fight with nature or with cats—we all know it. profound sleep is 
not with him, a fixed illusion. springing about with froglike ac- 
curacy, emitting jerky cries when taken in the hand, he is himself 
again; to sit caged by the rungs of a domestic chair would be unprofit- 
able—human. what is the good of hypocrisy? it 
is permissible to choose one’s employment, to abandon the wire nail, the 
roly-poly, when it shows signs of being no longer a pleas- 
ure, to score the adjacent magazine with a double line of strokes. he can 
talk, but insolently says nothing. what of it? when one is frank, one’s very 
presence is a compliment. it is clear that he can see 
the virtue of naturalness, that he is one of those who do not regard 
the published fact as a surrender. as for the disposition 
invariably to affront, an animal with claws wants to have to use 
them; that eel-like extension of trunk into tail is not an accident. to 
leap, to lengthen out, divide the air—to purloin, to pursue, 
to tell the hen: fly over the fence, go in the wrong way—in your perturbation— 
this is life; to do less would be nothing but dishonesty. 
