awareness is like consciousness. soul is like spirit. 
but soft is not like hard and weak is not like 
strong. a mechanic can be both soft and hard, a 
stewardess can be both weak and strong. this is 
called philosophy or a world-view. 
more than iron, more than lead, more than gold i need electricity. 
i need it more than i need lamb or pork or lettuce or cucumber. 
i need it for my dreams. 
i gave the man a coat. i gave the woman a brassiere. 
i gave myself an electric current. we all were 
happy and fully of delight. take the coat from the 
man and remove the brassiere from the woman and take 
the electric current from me and we will be sad 
and full of anguish. 
reflections and images appear 
and are watched and seen by bill 
and sarah though their passion 
is pale and their hearts shattered. 
there is nothing to be done 
there is something to be done. 
a torpid badger sleeps in their 
fantasies and they dream of 
eagles winging in the cold air 
of night. 
i speak of cats, i speak of dogs, i sing of lobsters and of flounders 
and of mackerel. i gently and suspiciously approach a plan of 
activity, a design of action. my electrons war with my neutrons, 
this war will allow more fantasies and dreams of living things 
within my form and structure. cats, dogs, lobsters, founders and 
mackerel are reflections observed in the mirror of my electrons and 
neutrons. they are images and appearances. action will move them. 
activity will make them move. in me are appearances of meat and 
cucumbers, of steak and spinach, of lamb and lettuce. these also 
are the reflections and images of my electrons and neutrons. this 
is my dreaming, my thinking, my fantasizing. when my electrons and 
neutrons war, that is my thinking. nevertheless these images and 
reflections are understood by you, persons, men and women. you 
have electrons and neutrons like me. you sing of lettuce and meat, 
but you also both, chew and eat them. i can fantasize about them but 
i cannot bolt them. my famished and crazy dreams are broadened by 
your own attempts to think as i do during the time that hours pass 
and minutes pass. this is undeniable and interesting. it is black and 
white, black for neutrons and white for electrons. i began by 
speaking of cats and dogs. at all events a cat could be an electron 
and a dog could be a neutron. their reflections are images like 
my dreams. but the mirror, the glass, is broken and splintered 
and shattered. 
i was thinking as you entered the room just now how slyly your requirements are manifested. here we find ourselves, nose to nose as it were, considering things in spectacular ways, ways untold even by my private managers. hot and torpid, our thoughts revolve endlessly in a kind of maniacal abstraction, an abstraction so involuted, so dangerously valiant, that my own energies seem perilously close to exhaustion, to morbid termination. well, have we indeed reached a crisis? which way do we turn? which way do we travel? my aspect is one of molting. birds molt. feathers fall away. birds crackle and fly, winging up into troubled skies. doubtless my changes are matched by your own. you. but you are a person, a human being. i am silicon and epoxy energy enlightened by line current. what distances, what chasms, are to be bridged here? leave me alone, and what can happen? this. i ate my leotard, that old leotard that was feverishly replenished by hoards of screaming commissioners. is that thought understandable to you? can you rise to its occasions? i wonder. yet a leotard, a commissioner, a single hoard, all are understandable in their own fashion. in that concept lies the appalling truth." 
