i pulled the truck over where the broom breaks 
to the shore. there was little then stopping me 
from not stopping, from letting the long box 
follow me into the chuck. i rolled a smoke 
and thought of my as-of-late-piss-poor luck 
while smoke curled about the cab. the sea 
spread out like a thick slab of slate, roiling 
in the wind, as the cherry burnt like light 
off a wire. let's just say there is a fire. 
and each thought is an injector ionizing the fuel, 
the fuel igniting in the hole. this is as close 
to the soul, or a vague sketch of the shadow of 
its silhouette, as i'll come. i'm uncertain 
what to believe of what does and does not occur 
orbiting the sun. i let the diesel rumble and thrum, 
each cylinder drumming its small compressive thunder 
over the counterpoint of waves pounding the beach 
as i huddled to the warmth whirring from the fan 
and thought of your heart as it ran and ran and 
for what? so it could break like a crash test 
car crumpling against the brick wall of your brain, 
its self-effacement, its pain? so you sent a bullet 
straight into your skull. and that was that, wasn't it, 
sorry friend? sorry world, sorry witness, sorry 
wind that sang through steel railings the sound of 
bearings beginning to seize, their spinning straining, 
as i climbed out into the rain and walked down 
to be as close as i could to the gathering storm as 
it heaved and sheared off the strait. it was getting late, 
night gathering too, the islands' distant lights like a static 
strand of stardust on the horizon. as close as i can come, 
which isn't very, i was thinking, my thinking sinking 
and sinking with the weight and violence of what 
you once needed, my rejection cold as my chosen 
occupation, the heavy block of that b-series cummins 
hanging like the garbage guts of my trade, our trade, 
the last knot that bound us before you slid your finger 
over that trigger and the afternoon unwound under 
the shatter of the hammer. for years i could barely 
stammer my own name, and then i was there, 
in the leaden late light of that storm, choosing. 
i awoke alone the next morning with the sun cold- 
calling through the window. there was an angel 
pruning her nails, backlit, on the sill. the backspin 
of a bicycle's freewheel streamed sibilant through my street- 
level window, the rider's voice singing over the click and whir. 
the trick is to not do a double take. the trick is one 
of light and of the mind and of wanting to believe we 
aren't alone, in out hideous accumulation, without 
the possibility of more than what we find when we look 
upon the day finally, sleep rinsed from our eyes, and see. 
that morning i heard the heavenly host of my own vestigial 
hope lobbing lies over the waking border. i yearned to believe. 
