at parties i found myself drawn 
to those who seemed most 
like water. i love those nights 
we were in slight disarray, showing 
more ghost. we'll probably forget 
your name, they said, but tell it to us 
anyway. let's have it in the air. and 
isn't is strange that a poem has to 
begin 
and end? as if it was a framed photograph 
of a wave breaking and not simply 
a wave breaking. my four-year-old son 
intuitively understands the idea 
of transformers. once, as a plane, 
he lay down on his stomach, arms apart 
so passengers could enter the doors 
on the side of his ribs. i don't know why 
we'd have such trouble with this. did we 
read too many books upside-down 
and with anger? could we not do the extra 
second of homework when a stranger 
enters the room? there's a diner along 
this highway where with infinite coffee 
and infinite time we could solve this. 
transform ourselves into prisms 
or creeping vines or a stack of poems. 
better poems, i think. though we're bound 
to fail for hundreds of years, first. 
passing the self storage building 
with its quiet climate-controlled rooms 
makes me smile. the smile you're 
on camera! sign in the dollar store 
doesn't. i can clip the labels from 
the inside collar of my shirt but it just 
itches more. paint over my storefront 
awnings, but the original text ghosts 
through. when i borrow someone's pen 
my handwriting changes—somewhere 
halfway between mine and theirs. 
but a few pages in, it's mostly just mine. 
almost. not entirely. by the end 
of the long night we've built adapters 
upon adapters so that all our devices, 
no matter from what place or time, 
can talk to each other. by then 
we're so exhausted, our code frayed, 
the floor a tripping hazard of tangled 
wires. still though, right? dawn's light 
surfaces like homework solving 
itself. our ghosts massaging their 
equations. i'm sunk into the couch, 
thirsty as hell, dreaming a river 
that flows right through the room. 
a river i know i can drink from 
because it's moving, clear. 
