a wail in a minor key along the hudson valley shore. 
this train calls to familiars. a pond of swans 
under a red maple consults in the folds 
of its bishopric. i thought of an evening two junes ago. 
the first of the group of schoolgirls on the sidewalk 
started to run. the others started to run behind her 
in their party dresses, all yelling, "don't run! don't run!" 
laughing and looking like they were having 
the time of their lives. i noticed one girl 
near the back of the group, laughing and yelling 
after them, a bit taller, darker, swept up in it 
for no other reason than itself. lost now too, 
sitting in 14b in pashmina and dark glasses, 
i might as well be the smyrna merchant. 
i've never been good at small talk; 
besides which, we'll be in new york in about an hour. 
later that night, i remembered the way she laughed 
as she ran, and in the morning, her face 
was the first thing i saw when i woke. it seems now 
she'd shown me what had come to me once 
and was now gone. travelling from montréal over a month ago, 
i can't believe they let a stranger into this country. 
they didn't admit the syrian poet scheduled 
to lecture at nyu two days before. i small-talked 
the homeland security officer about his upcoming trip 
to guelph, ontario, where his wife's from. 
love, another poet once claimed, 
could show us from the vase's broken pieces 
what's been lost, and what i understood was 
that the vase, if put back together, 
becomes an unbroken thing we believe 
we might lose again, and so we do. 
i don't stick to the facts— 
what if i wrote lines that took nothing 
but the shape of my thoughts? 
no irritable reaching for an old story, 
no derailed, hanger-on lurk. 
a rail bridge connects the old playground 
to the abandoned car lot—i say that knowing 
i don't have to hand anyone even one more idea on this, 
and exactly nobody would be asked to relate, 
to say nothing of the woman's fitted wool coat on the seat opposite, 
symbol of my fragility or mortality. 
is that poetic license? it's not something i need to know, 
this man says, then gets up to get coffee. 
the sky is now a diluted pistachio green over the hudson. 
they call it stranger's weather. 
i rather think i did ask, a poem about the river asked. 
i asked too—not about a better view; 
about someone entirely different, about what remains 
after the broken vase is no longer a recognizable vessel. 
