the terrible beauty of the reserve 
train wrecks, rare fossils 
transition 
tu me manques 
under construction 
union station 
witch hunt 
racter poems 
uninhabited 
injun 
omnivore 
distracted by an ergonomic bicycle 
on day and night 
the sympathy of angels 
a local history 
the cree word for a body like mine is weesageechak 
love is a moontime teaching 
mornings with the one glove 
feel happier in nine seconds 
water glass 
african evening 
homecoming 
happiness is not the only happiness 
ideal world 
if you see it what is it you see 
the myth of orpheus 
the meaning of life 
the ship 
part of the main 
iain lachlan campbell 
et in arcadia ego 
the fifth season 
funny 
victoria soto 
that great burgundy-upholstered beacon of dependability 
harvest moon lantern festival 
pastorals in the atrium 
yes, 
windstorm 
regeneration machine 
by way of explanation 
the goodnight skirt 
self storage 
repose 
pender and hamilton 
little voice 
amygdala 
anniversary 
there must be a name for this 
terra nova, terraformed 
look book 
euro—anishinaabekwe—noli turbare 
a wake 
self-portrait cemetery 
they moved my friends 
nausicaa 
killarnoe 
ah 
armadillo 
i am in love with your brother 
the masturbating flowers 
the pinata 
song for the field behind mississauga valley public school 
the internet 
foley artist 
voodoo hypothesis 
keepers of paradise 
don draper 
poseurs 
stranger 
appetites 
portrait of suburban housewife as missing woman 
skipping stones 
party music 
meeting the tormentors in safeway 
radio 
prague 
redbird 
snake handler 
song of the last shaker 
the trouble with wormholes 
good day villanelle 
i do not think that i could love a human being 
materials 
at the farm 
bare 
seriously, it was the biggest cricket 
earworm 
mayor snow 
the walls 
through the restaurant window 
we bought a little city 
self-portrait 
not saying 
he will tell me later the story of the woman he has been alluding to all day 
poems: 
above picasso and his musings 
1. 
ineptitude's tidings 
ashore me, i'm sprawling stumble- 
drunk in seawrack 
and this grandiose spree of green 
beholds an odd bouquet. 
back at the old sandy blanket, our bodies 
mold mayhem; 
math majors enumerate games 
in the indivisible darkness. 
during a breather, we marvel at the midnight bay 
as it welters moseyingly 
under terminal city's distant subtractions. 
on higher ground, 
my bed has sprung a squeak. tempest- 
tossed, we let it squawk. 
2. 
at loftier 
elevations: picasso and his muses, 
an exhibit we visit 
on our friendship date. 
under a thrust of rain, 
we give up on appearances and sling warmth; 
a false-creeker 
shouts hubba-hubba. 
we shroud the light in a beach-blanket. 
this is more or less 
how it all came to pass. i have no secrets 
in my vending machine home. 
3. 
pablo diego josé francisco de paula juan 
nepomuceno maría de los remedios cipriano 
de la santísima trinidad ruiz y picasso, 
a baby soothered in saints. 
fernande olivier. orphan. pedastelled sixty times. 
pablo builds her a shrine. we stand 
close in front of the dancing 
olga khokhlova minutes. susurrations red-carpet 
marie-thérèse walter's allegorized 
lips. we almost touch by the dora 
maar moments under "a comfortable routine 
interrupted by world war two." 
we read ever so close, then glide 
by geneviève laporte who refuses to move 
in with her lover, which is what 
(she tells françoise gilot) 
"saves her skin." 
later, old pablo mistakes 
a parking meter in madrid 
for jacqueline roque's face. he paints 
the parking meter seventy times. 
4. 
on our second date 
you hold out a gift. i open 
a white piece of paper 
with more creases than a hundred 
hands. it's a map, 
you say. next, you make 
a compass from blue string. 
this will guide 
me through my beachcombing time 
collecting gribble-wrought scrimshaw 
for a sculpture i'm building to the annals 
of honesty hoarders. i'm part 
of many secret clubs. you 
shall know us by our bookshelves' 
blisteringly thin spines. 
i should have put 
that out-of-order sign on my cubist 
pile of a soul long ago. 
some coinage is stuck 
behind my five-dimensional eyes, 
but i want everything 
and you, your mind 
of galax, ivy, peruvian lily, pine, 
pussy willow, yellow rose, and other 
secret handshakes from flowers. 
you incite objects into a rube goldberg 
kabbalah, you're a radiance-chain 
of life-hacks, embroidery, and odyssean cunning. 
as i work out my zonked 
manufacturing to make way towards us 
at play. we genuflect 
in a ceremony of touching, go gung-ho 
into the amalgamating depths. 
after lorne 
the doughy older man in a marine bulldogs jacket 
signals his wife in the crowded hospital pharmacy, 
clutching his bagged prescription like a dead pheasant. 
that's what it takes to get things done, he tells her 
and the rest of the waiting room.if nothing happens, 
you gotta investigate. that's what it means to be a marine. 
yes, lorne, she mutters as he herds her to the exit, 
her weariness suggesting she is familiar with his 
credo. yes, lorne—and now the rest of us awaiters 
wait, faces raised like forlorn hatchlings, mouths 
wide, lest we miss our last name/first initial flashed 
upon the electronic screen way up near the ceiling. 
this room used to be a participatory democracy. 
now we are mere fools of please & thank you. 
we read our patient education leaflets. we wait. 
outside, darkness falls on the extravagant city. 
anishnaabemowin 
this is what came before the world 
it was this 
that called the world 
into being 
so much older than what 
we speak now 
it has flowed through 
more of your ancestors 
than any other 
it has flowed within me 
even when i don't understand 
especially then 
i don't really know 
how you 
came into being 
it must have been this 
that called you 
bells 
stars originate from 
the same place as bells 
what should i be thinking about? 
apparently may 6th 
is world naked gardening day 
if a school were a uterus 
someone writes 
the politicians would protect 
the children inside 
a cupped hand 
a mouthful of water 
snowball the shape of a hand 
after 9/11 i remember writing 
something sarcastic 
intended to be zen 
a poem about not being able to find a sock 
i pissed off the poet 
george murray 
but i realize it's true 
anytime i've lost a sock 
someone's being shot 
even when i haven't lost one 
once my son went with my in-laws and the rabbi 
to the lake 
tashlich: dropping bread into water 
casting off sins 
why am i doing this 
my son said don't believe in it 
what about making the world better? 
the rabbi asked 
yes my son said yes 
my son and i 
late autumn 
walking under the golden leaves 
on my desk 
a stapler, paperclips, some books 
laptop open to american news 
biscuit factory 
send my regards to the paris streets, the poet wrote * 
from exile in america. i will do the same to the room 
on alma, close to the eiffel tower, 
where i stayed with jeannie, from alaska, 
and her turkish friend, hanife. 
one room, with a hotplate, for the three of us, 
a toilet near the stair. while a man unlocked the door 
and stood, laughing, admiring my panties, 
his girlfriend emptied their furniture 
into the foyer. the night of my 24thbirthday, 
the cards predicted disaster before i unfastened my handbag 
in the restaurant, to pay. someone had stolen my wallet 
and passport in the metro; it was a long way back 
to our street since erased by an upgrade. 
hanife knew a phonebox where foreigners called 
long distance for free. i lined up behind moroccans and turks, 
and phoned my mother at work where a kwakiutl sun 
blazed on the wall behind her. at lunchtime 
she went to the bank in her red high heels, 
and sent me money. why else am i here, 
but to wander until i remember 
the red brick ormand biscuit factory 
near where my father worked in victoria? 
thick black fuel tanks sprang from the ground 
where condos now simper. my father climbed 
to the top of the silos on a winding steel ladder 
to document gauges. we drove up in the chevy, 
to fetch him for dinner, my mother in a red-belted 
peter pan dress and stockings. he gave us treats— 
nickels, raisins, candies—; he emptied his pockets, 
and then my brother and i climbed up the side of the vats 
as high as we could before our parents finished their kiss, 
and noticed us. you know, the condos there now, 
where the oil tanks were, 
and the biscuit factory turned into self-storage, 
are nothing to what happened to the girls 
i thought were my friends, and me. 
we lined up at dior in paris with the models, 
and went in. our hair shone like glass, and we glittered, too, 
all three of us, with our fine, invisible, unusable talents. 
the breast for sappiness 
the whole idea seems inconceivably distant like something half recalled from childhood disney misremembered as if our brains have grown up absent the wiring capable of appreciating that being unhappy at times does not mean we are unhappy we all get caught even those who cannot say their worms correctly or use the wrong worms entirely so that no one underhands a bird they are spraying still they are on a breast for sappiness a constrained model constructed in the brain a rock in a river unseen except for the curl of foam when the current knocks against it a mist of seething we are cheerful but somewhat unsettled become accustomed to chuckle as minor detail or stylish accessory scratch that asinine explanation that happiness means to be with god it's the wiring isn't it that means we lurch all our wives for the all-holy spot of mould while a seagull hangs unnoticed in the sunset and ravel's g major piano concerto roams the primeval cave making all your cells quiver like feathers on fish 
conspiracy of love 
for those who are clean and sober 
the problem with trying to one-up yourself 
is not that you might die by your own hands, 
but that you'll be able to justify why 
without feeling anything. when you were 
in withdrawal, alone in your bed, the salt 
from the sweat pressed on the mattress was testimony 
to what you allowed: "i am satan, because i deal 
in language." the next day, you had stopped 
shaking, you went to work secular and clean. 
there were no other addicts and you didn't speak. 
you know that lies look beautiful, unified, all parts 
clicking together, lighting up your eyes. they are old 
technology made new, sleek and gleaming 
in crevasses like fog rolling around renfrew. 
you're awake today to see it, because you've been 
brave. you've noticed your friend has listened 
and told you very boring things—not dismissed 
them as errands. this is the task you will have to do, 
soon enough, remembering all the ways your mind 
moved—to write yourself into what you want 
to call conspiracy of love.when the guy from tinder 
said hi to you in school, it didn't strike you 
that he might know you from the internet. you didn't 
remember who he was, not even when he called you 
by your fake name. all you thought was, "i can't 
do this again. i want to be clean. i want to be shazia." 
if you end this poem here, it might make sense, 
but we both know this kind of work is occult. 
so, you have to ask me: how do you want to finish 
this poem? you have to leave it there. that way 
at least it's not about you anymore. 
cree dictionary 
the translation for joy 
in cree is a fried bologna sandwich 
the translation for bittersweet in cree 
looks like a cows and ploughs payment 
eight decades too late 
the translation for patience 
in cree is an auntie looking after four of her own children 
and two of her sister's 
the translation for evil 
in cree is the act of not calling 
your mother on a sunday 
the translation for expedition 
in cree is travelling 20 minutes 
to the only gas station in faust, alberta 
to buy a hygaard pizza sub 
the translation for success in cree 
is executing the perfect frog splash 
on your younger brother 
the cree word for white man is unpaid child support 
the translation for conflicted in cree 
is your deep, steadfast love 
for country superstar 
dwight yoakam (or depending on 
the regional dialect, 
george jones, patsy cline 
or blue rodeo) 
the cree word for constellation 
is a saskatoon berry bush in summertime 
the translation for policeman 
in cree is mîci nisôkan, kohkôs 
the translation for genius 
in cree is my kohkum muttering in her sleep 
the cree word for poetry is your four-year-old 
niece's cracked lips spilling out 
broken syllables of nêhiyawêwin in-between 
the gaps in her teeth 
crystals 
b clicks fistfuls of amethysts. b is six. earlier this week, 
in an agassiz campground, she held a tiny 
abandoned rabbit. watership down, 
but with ravers, 
fire driving out the wildlife for the new wild life, edm 
and bike lights, b's mother gripping 
capsules stuffed 
with crystals 
in her fist. i tell my mother i never want kids. my mother teaches 
motherhood in ontario woods, leads la leche league, 
squirrels worn-out clothes 
for quilts to send 
overseas. my blood is hot, monthly, laced with misanthropy. 
these years as b's nanny, her nature scraping 
against my nurture. 
her mother 
couldn't breastfeed, couldn't risk trickling helixes of infected 
t cells, says she sometimes senses this 
distance. what bits of 
my mother 
insist in me? to what do i affix our distance? the burr thicket of it, 
sticky. the body's crystal arithmetic. b gives me 
an amethyst, tells me how 
the rabbit's heart 
beat beneath her fingertips. 
cxxvii 
i'm staring at shakespeare's poem. blocked. carnage because black was not counted fairly. torn into faithless weather because literature assured black bodies bore no right to beauty's name, because until now is black's traumatology streaming in successive waves. the critics never unpack the intestinal douleur of one's own beauty slandered with a bastard shame. informed since i could read by the monarchy's hand on the throat of english, i've put on an enunciative face, trusting the figure of speech's power to fair the ink of english thinking. the foreign anguish, language! with art's facelessness i borrowed legit face; with my sweet syntax, a beauty that they couldn't disown. shame on who? shame on who? i'm literally bowed over the keyboard of my computer. sometimes you see yourself profaned. sometimes you're profaned—nothing unusual—by the archives you're working in. why feel disgraced in two thousand seventeen? le professeur francophone que j'ai rencontré on bumble blanks at my imaginary stresses: okay, your poems are about race, but we don't have to think in black and white over dinner, do we? somebody doesn't. this situation suits some bodies just fine, and they will date me, if i don't bring work home. i'm churning through shakespeare's sonnet, contemplating easier occupations. my children, who were not born into fairness, who no beauty ever lacked, who grievously never happened at all, read this grudging creation over my shoulder. they are with me always, as i fail at ease. they don't exist, as i cleave to my poetry like a significant other who never asks anything of me, who isn't hurt by my inability to lighten up. nothing's coming, just a gust of weather, a failure to work through a sonnet's hatred. slavery's tongue is in my head, kissing me, saying smile, smile, beauty shouldn't look so hard. 
diiiiiiiiid iiiiitttt happen 
the stage is cluttered with family members and smiles. you fill out index cards. press buttons. feel buoyed by laughter and attention. 
a question goes up on the board. you're in it to win it. you're not here to make friends. "what is—the reason she says she drinks." (yay, points!) 
"what is—reasons to lock your bedroom door." 
(points!)(points!)(points!) 
mom says, "i'll take—pretend it never happened—for 500." 
she sweeps the board. (applause! cries!) 
it doesn't matter. you're pretty sure you're ahead. 
you're in the bonus round. you take turns. one person tells a secret, the others press either a true or a false button. the audience will shout the results from flashing lights you can't see. just above your heads, lit by the red glow, you can feel the verdict coming. 
doing the death we call pretty 
i could look to the trees rusting in the rain, 
doing the death we call pretty. instead, i lord 
a little over people parking, coming & goingremark silent 
on body language—what gait is revealing— 
while i wait by the printer for a report 
i don't even need. the chore, it let me remember 
the world, free & flowing. on the hospital elevator 
this morning, an ancient head-scarfed woman 
w/a beard, wheeled by four jockeying children. 
a young, halfway-pregnant couple. a womanmy mother's shape 
in a bob wig, on her way to the breast clinic. 
a surgeon'scrocs streaked w/purple-brown blood. 
jackson pollock.in the caf, a man tosses fries 
into his mouth for breakfast,his entire head & eyes 
bandaged up, white & soft as a q-tip. vision 
is my drug. i can't tell if it's working, b/c how 
did my life become a sequence of how do i kill 
the next ten minutes? & the next ten? & the next? 
when is someone going to finally turnto me & say, 
all this time,what have you been doing? 
it will be an accusation, & a mercy. 
don 
don coles died today. today, katie, 
a student i taught, published her first 
book. i think of my teacher, mike, who don 
taught, and i think of all the lessons that 
don must have taught me through mike, all 
mike taught katie through me. i think of 
the thirsty—cupped hands passing water into 
cupped hands passing this water, without 
breaks, into another cupped pair. i'm amazed 
at how much we can drink and still have more 
to share. i think of all i learned from katie 
just now, reading in the dusky subway light 
the first poem in her first book, and i am 
amazed at how the rapids of her lesson 
rush back through me to mike to don, 
another tributary in this miracle river 
that flows in both directions at once. it dawns 
on me how amazing it is that i can be a river 
at the same time that i'm a man underground, 
breaking down on a train, at the same time 
that i'm a ceaseless pen, that i'm blurred words 
clarified through tears, that i'm ink that dreams  it's 
elgin county 
in my mother's black kiadriving home from my grandparents' 
on christmas eve eve 
through white-blue snow clumpedin the diminished wheat fields 
surrounding 
threadbare barns and abandoned grey houseswhiter snow hanging 
on the dark pines 
like shearling trim along the highwaythe sky saturated with itself 
and lines of geese 
and white and grey flycatcherswhile voracious crows interpret 
the innards 
of roadkill deer and raccoonsand no people really just the radio 
in and out 
pop holiday classicsand the cbc hourly counting catastrophes 
while just hours before 
i pressed my grandmotherat her long dining table on the french 
cousin who died 
in another stretch of farmlandthe gay architect-turned-artist 
returned from england 
with cancer of the mouthandmy mother said aidsin a pause 
inserted the word 
like a pill beneath the tongueaidsas if we could mistake it 
cancer of the mouth 
for parentheticalas ifhow terrible the wordsaids 
on all our tonguescancer 
of the moutheven if not spokenthe diagnosis confirmed 
they think 
in the bright living roomof one or another cousinshe's not sure 
andhow terrible 
he was thirty-seven i thinkthey thinkand his sister 
now has a daughterpink 
and whitean innocentandshe is the family joy 
andi stared at my grandmother 
her face lit by a pairof tiffany lamps on the maple hutch 
wondering 
where my widow's peak came from if not from her 
flattering 
the beautiful woman 
at the bridal store, 
with a bowl cut 
and distressed 
clogs, walks lauren 
to a mirror world. 
wow—your hips are 
invisible in this. 
it's just so flattering. 
it's like 
where did you even go? 
where are you? 
where are you? 
fuji, baby 
as the hr macmillan space centre's sky 
theatre goes dim, my thoughts flip back 
like a page to honshu island, 
tourists ascending eroded, trash- 
laden paths under cover of darkness 
to glimpse milky morning light 
from fuji's summit. recently, 
i watched a video of the sun rising 
to calm myself. then clicked on 
a weird time-lapse gif depicting 
how a mother's internal organs 
move out of the way as her baby 
grows. when i tried to find it again 
to show you, i couldn't get 
the search term right. i can't forget 
how the sonographer paused, 
transducer in hand, to say "let's double- 
check that," her words a fault line 
in my heart cracking open. 
after the appointment, i took a taxi 
to meet you for the concert, 
frantically googling normal bi-parietal 
diameter en route, too petrified to read 
the results it generated. you said 
the musician was hosting a workshop, 
"laugh with laraaji," to help people 
get in touch with their inner child. i 
couldn't tell if you were 
confessing your desire to attend, 
mentioning it for my sake, or as 
a joke. sure, i've been under some 
stress lately. moving slow as a parade 
float drenched in tinsel. because 
my heart hurts. doubled blood volume 
roiling like lava through four red 
chambers. each day, up with the sunrise 
because my inner child is a metaphor 
and a literal tiny child who kicks 
me awake. myself and someone 
else, two me's. when he flipped 
into breach, i spent a week doing 
inversions on the carpet. you shone 
an incandescent flashlight 
at my belly, placed foam headphones 
around it. on the advice of 
the acupuncturist, burned moxa 
by my pinkie toes, hoping the heat 
would transmit a message to our son: 
go easy on me. everyone in the sky 
theatre is 23 and high and not 
pregnant. they smell like sweat 
and spearmint gum. i don't care 
anymore. laraaji is banging a gong 
and cackling into a microphone 
as galaxies slide on curved screens 
above his head. he wears robes 
the colour of the scorching sun. 
sometimes laughter swims 
through the body like a sound 
wave travelling back to the probe 
as an echo but there's no gif 
depicting this. cherry blossoms 
fall like floral meteors into a pond 
behind the planetarium at the same 
rate of speed as at the base of fuji. 
a mother eagle assembles a sturdy 
moss and feather loft for her newborns 
in the highest tree in vanier park 
because the view is nice. perhaps 
japanese bird mothers do the same, 
because who wouldn't want 
the very best for their children's 
eyeballs? who wouldn't want to 
listen to the calming sounds of 
laraaji's collaborator brian eno 
during 39 hours of labour 
followed by emergency c-section? 
you place an ipod beside 
the hospital bathtub and apollo 
drowns out my screams. i see stars. 
fly to japan. leave earth's atmosphere 
in a nitrous-fuelled rocket ship. 
beta blockers slow pyroclastic flows 
in my heart through the worst of it. 
even in this altered state, 
i'm only pretending i don't know 
what is happening to me. i know. 
as they lift the tiny person over 
the paper scaffolding and place him 
on my chest like a warm island, 
the sun rises over a mountain 
of ash and snow, carving living pathways 
through the maternity ward. 
how soon, how likely, how severe 
the first day, the fire climbed the slash like a jungle gym and leapt to the canopy. we dug out eight kilometers of hand line where the slope was too steep for the cat. i snapped a pulaski and ground my palms to burger. thank god we're not a dry camp. the next three days, the pump rattled like a datsun cresting the coquihalla. it sucked from the pond until the shallows quivered with a jelly of tadpoles. we drew a circle in two-inch hose and bare soil and called the fire contained. if anyone asks, kamloops, the fire is contained. we spend our overtime among the black spires of burnt fir, sniffing for the socks-on-the- camp-stove scent of smouldering duff. i wake up pawing the motel carpet for hot spots. a voice on the handheld asks if i remember my old life. i remember ground fire creeping from root to root, approaching an interface with the unspoken. a threat under the surface. now, i could load my duffel into a chopper and fly, nose down, along the seam of the present tense. self-sufficient for twenty-four hours with a bird's-eye view of the point of ignition. 
kill poem 
i found a mouse 
caught in the trap. 
i killed the mouse 
with quick little taps. 
its shrieks were squeaks 
to my human ears. 
tap tap tap 
with my boot heel. 
the mouse man came 
with all his poisons. 
little pink pellets 
is what was chosen. 
now no mice 
move through the walls. 
now no mice 
bother to call. 
little pink pellets, 
little pink pills. 
it's all very human, 
i don't have to kill. 
no mice in the walls 
means i can work. 
tap tap, a poem. 
tap tap, this verse. 
letter to atleo from the old shell station near buckhorn 
dear shawn: you should have seen it, the way that yellow and orange clam shell glowed like the flame atop a machinery stack, the way it burned into that pre-winter night. we were on our way up to those old spearfishing traps on big bald lake in the offseason when we came upon it. couldn't help but to think of you and how you kept yourself warm with harper and all his suncor buddies along the grand shores of kitchissippi. we all know the sort of muck that oil and sand can make out of you, and we all know that heat breaks down viscosity, so we thought of you and stopped a little while at the station. or at least, that's the sort of learning that assimilation brings our actions to nowadays. but you remember that truth is in the handwriting of the cheque writer. we all know that bureaucrats write up those beautiful six-foot-by-two-foot photo ops. they are the closest thing any modern-day indian has to being on currency. the boys and i saw you, a big grey wolf wide smile, and knew that we had to pay with a cheque. debit cards and credit are for places with industry and names that remind of us of how empty our lives were before hydroelectric projects and government transparency acts. you know us, always looking to prove ourselves better than average treaty indians, we took a couple of photos of us handing over the fifteen dollar rbc cheque to old man macintosh beneath that setting sun of a shell sign. sure, everything is astronomically more expensive off reserve, but who needs family, friends, or culture when a little bit of currency and big city fame can float between you and those making those james bay sized cheques. best, 
j.w. 
the lipstick effect 
you know you need a new one when you're bored 
or overcome or underwhelmed, or sad, 
when you can feel the jangles of your age; 
when you have matters weighing on your mind 
(the news, your kids, the heft of your behind)— 
or change arrives, the flipping of a page: 
you lose a job, move house, cremate your dad, 
then add another colour to the hoard 
amassed in your boudoir. their names alone 
inspire revolution at some level, 
assuring you there's fire down below 
(your husband says it's snuffed), a latent vamp, 
a dolce vita waiting where you camp 
and, on the prairie, cherries in the snow. 
beneath the paint, you're neither sleek nor evil. 
it's just the tubes, the hollow names, you own. 
marketplace 
and another thing the realtor says islisten, kids, i've been around the block for a cool decade. think i'm bullshitting you? i practically invented selfie- with-misspelled-name-on-starbucks-cup and our eyes flit to the desk where a marble paperweight in the shape of an inukshuk throws shade across his nameplate 
you and i, we've always been suckers for stacked rocks and authority figures with sun-damaged hair, so we shrink back and whisperwe don't know where we belongdropping hands below the city's sight to make fishhooks of our pinkies 
he laughsyou think someone gave me a trout? i had to learn toand makes a casting motion, silver watch leaping at his wrist and we know this is where home is, shy of the surface, hooked always and thrashing beneath. 
my mother gave me 
a photo album. there were a handful 
of pictures and i am the same age 
in every one. there is one photo of me 
and my father on the day he taught me 
how to ride my bike. we are laughing 
and in the lower left corner is a small 
boy sitting on a park bench watching us. 
he's my brother. i always thought 
he was the favourite one, the one 
they really wanted. i did not think 
of what i might have looked like to him. 
he is looking on in this photo, sitting 
on a park bench. he does not have a bike 
of his own. it is the same with his clothes. 
the clothes he wore had been mine, 
green overalls, blue shirt, all the winter jackets 
and snowsuits. never knowing the feel of new 
things. even the haircut he has is mine. 
in a few years, he too will have this bike. 
but no one will have taken the time to teach 
him how to ride it without the training wheels 
because they had come off years before. he 
will ride this bike as i left it, like everything else 
i had, and it will still be pink and the flowers printed on it 
will still be there. there will be no picture of that day. 
there is only a picture of this day. 
this day of him sitting on the park bench alone, 
hands in his lap, looking on and waiting for his turn. 
nancy creek: end of summer 
your soles found cement and you stopped 
horizontal just under the surface. 
nancy creek ends 
in a culvert you discovered 
three days after drowning. 
fuck you for ruining august 
when everyone 
and their step-parents drink pepsi 
kokanee on plastic chairs 
in backyards, the creek 
and cicadas drenching the air, toss bottles 
peanuts down into the water. 
you drowned in fawn lake five kilometres 
upstream and evaded 
everyone for three and a half stupid days. 
they closed the swimming area, men 
with dogs in the rushes. pylons 
lined the highway and tumbled 
in the rain. all that time 
you hid underwater, travelled 
feet-first with your face to the bottom, mud 
in your skin, turning circles 
in the silt 
thick current where the dogs 
couldn't find you. 
you left one nike 
behind the vaughns' house, caught 
in an eddy, kept worming 
downstream behind the fences 
of everyone you knew, through tree roots. 
your other shoe snagged 
on the underside of benji's dock 
with the yellow 
plastic waterslide 
we used to ride screaming. 
o sea of troubles we did not take arms against 
for many moons we were complete like a single river & for many mornings i dreamt the grooves of your chest & small of your back would propel me to the stars & that they were the missing parts of me like the hollow of a thirsty earth & i believed your divergences were the desire for me to complete you but it was all just a collection of rapids clashing fast & just on the outskirts of sublimity our bodies always flirting with disappearance & now i half-disappeared each night wailing with adoration & horror for the reality is we met in a flurry of sea dust & the sad sounds of unbecoming upon the foamy cascade ofpeligrowaves we did not take arms against but passed through veils of glass & i will never forget how even i forgot miami for the most part since we laughed all night & day & even laughed at our future which we chose to wave away in skylines & do you remember my body in truesirenafashion & how you adored with dopey eyes my body of black mother-of-pearl & how wild & sweet those days that melted into one another & how sleep & fire & water & tears became the same& so we slept in mangled ways upon the dark shorelines of old vows but now my heart is a blue wound which i hope you will oneday forgive me my love for in the rapidsof our delirious & beautiful past wadingwaiting wading shall i spend my life 
ode to the cockroach 
ferrous body, feral heart, you were forged elsewhere—alloy of alien parts: the brassy husk, barbed limbs. form built for velocity, fiery wings throttle air, compel those swift stems of liquorice to make haste to clandestine spaces to flourish, to feast on stamp glue, peppermint wrappers, bits of lint. at dusk, you declare regency over each room. a blade of light cleaves the gloom momentarily adorns the authority of antennae. you are reborn at night, you glow auburn, glower. those prehistoric eyes prowl this hive, divining the embryonic to the refined. creature without coda or quota. like dark matter, everywhere unseen & everywhere in between. you combat lessening with glut, a brew of genetics & good luck. you bend the world to your bias, &—like a virus—you're always keen to reinvent. if called for, your bellies embrace deprivation. adaptation is your birthright—to outlive, outlast. something encoded in the brain convulses with closure; corrodes restraint, compels you closer to the carnal. (procreate & you may replicate something of the eternal.) kinetic with intent, you tear into the hereafter, bold beneath the aegis, the armour of grit & sinew. you understand as we do: time is carnivorous. 
open 
everywhere: open, open. stores, banks. stores, banks. 
gas stations. open, open later, open. 
for as long as i can remember, i have thought about stealing. 
once i scoped out and robbed the number five orange. 
the storage cellar had a steel hatch at ground level 
with an easily removable commercial padlock. 
i shimmied down through the small square opening 
and with the city police station a block away, 
in perfect calm i hoisted cases of beer to an accomplice. 
in the weeks after, i got drunk many times for free. 
my most professionally carried out act of crime gone  unnoticed, 
i could not help it, i gave in, i told people— 
drinking at the st. alice in north van, 
bragging about the great cache in my car, 
i ended up on the capilano reserve, 
and i and two old school friends shared the last of the labatts. 
out in the river in the dark, we gaffed coho, 
laughing as we arrested pilgrim after silver pilgrim 
beginning its ascent to the top of the canyon to spawn and die. 
the tide was coming in, sea and river water 
moving together, wrapping around me 
where i stood in pants and shoes swaying, tottering. we gaffed. 
we chucked salmon into the now empty trunk. 
i would take it home and eat it. they would take it home 
and eat it, or sell it. we gaffed. the oncoming wild eyes 
of the fish staring straight into the first rays of the late  summer sun. 
the angled mouths of the fish, the blackness: open, open. 
parthenope and virgil 
women are cities & cities 
are humiliating. 
tourists haggle the price 
& somehow still pay double. 
the city is leaky 
& smells like fishwives. 
locals chide in dialect 
tangy as a faux leather belt. 
men are angry & angry men 
turn each other into volcanoes. 
what is it like to live 
in the shadow of a volcano? 
on the cusp of eruption 
it's exciting 
for the tourists. burning through 
their cash, it's all you can smell. 
volcanoes violate cities 
to ash & stone. it's a pity. 
i'd pumice my feet with it all if i could. 
poem in which i remember mary taylor on an april tuesday 
i checked my email, resenting its incursion into 
the blue morning. 
my husband was culling books. i thought we should keep 
a naturalist's guide to ontario. (oh, 
all the things we thought we'd get to, rocks, 
bogs and fields, 
the shaping of moraines.) the garbage truck 
came by, opened capacious metal arms 
to hoist the bin, then set it down. i sorted 
sections of the star and villager, refrained 
from clipping recipes, remembering 
anne's advice: only 
if you'll make the avocado soup that day. i peeled 
a clementine, 
leafed through mail piled in the kitchen basket, 
searching 
charitable receipts and t3 slips. "dear mr. president," 
wrote saul bellow's herzog, 
"internal revenue regulations will turn us into a nation 
of bookkeepers." i settled 
at my desk, the surface strewn with tax. 
out the window, sun 
on the white wood of a torn branch, and still-bare 
branches rebounding from 
invisible trampolines, while something like the quietest 
wind seemed part 
of the tree-shadow on my neighbour's shed roof and 
the teacup-shadow on 
my littered desk—breathing in and 
breathing out 
what mary taylor 
used to say, when 
i'd meet her in the hallway. 
"how are you today, mary?" 
"oh, just breathing in and breathing out." 
ah 
then we went back to work. 
police horse makes escape down fort york boulevard 
pike dialled 911. 
some sooty bay, 
mahogany, or other 
ambiguity of brown 
wearing a lime-green 
vest, cantered down 
the condo-ed boulevard 
un-policed, not panicked 
but with purpose. yeah, 
i think he's one of yours. 
heading for the gardiner. 
pike dialled 911. 
it was the sound 
that spurred him 
to the window. not 
that flimsy, foleyed 
cobblestone effect 
but calamitously real. 
anachronistic prophecy: 
the past is clamorous 
and mean, and steals 
the present as it flees. 
pike dialled 911. 
put his sandwich down 
and picked his camera up. 
time froze, adventure-less 
as snow, like stupefying 
parkette art, or tellers' smiles 
at the bmo. only 
the horse running now 
beneath the underpass 
toward home, the palace, 
those hay-crammed stables, 
to feast, like history, 
on today's brief freedom. 
the reader 
but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
red-eye 
dear country, did you wait for me? 
did you halt yellow trains as they vipered the engineered rural, 
did you quiet currents, letting duckweed 
slowly lock the waters—have you been a grand museum 
of immobile waterfowl and ruminants, flies 
on their nostrils, millipede life under leaf rot, 
stock still—where it rained, did glass drops hover 
in a splintered universe of damp, 
dear land, when i dropped the spindle, did you pull the main? 
did you freeze in the air the motions of bicyclists, hooligans, 
vendors, classroom chalk scraping in cursive, 
past imperfect—was there a static silence 
on all radios? 
sunrise. here is that private sea scrolling in, 
typing you an endless letter. the plane makes its fluid,  plummeting turn, 
and my window fills with land. here is the clay 
that holds the brittle calcium of them who made me, have they waited— 
because i waited for you, in my blind and percolating marrow 
all the years i waited, sleepwalking, speaking a daft language flawlessly. 
now the roads are ribbons, and the cars begin to crawl, 
and i would like to rise with you; i'd like to be so awake. 
i've drunk repeated coffees from a small and unbreakable cup 
that a child might use to serve tea to a wiry monkey 
and a one-eyed bear. but i have left 
her in another country, sleeping. 
and my hands shake. 
the second fall 
happens at the theatre. we embrace and i am panicked-calm, 
a mouse wrapped in a snake, my small sparrow heart rattling 
its cage as i seek out your farm boy smell: grease oil dirt 
lentils spoiled. i look for a husk forgotten, caught in a lock 
of your hair. i want to ask about the woman behind you 
because she is beautiful and staring with eyes like lake louise. 
but my tongue is stiff, a bleached carp, plump carcass 
on pebbled sand. i bend down to pick it up, trip 
into the water. and you are french braiding my hair the way 
your sisters taught you. and you are carving out the feathery bones 
of jackfish on your counter. and you are whipping 
brown sugar and flour into a soft syrup, offering me the spoon. 
and you are driving your boat through a ditch the summer 
all of saskatchewan flooded and everyone thanked god 
for crop insurance. and you are reading out loud to me, 
your tongue stumbling. (you say sorry and i say i don't mind 
but i do a little.) and you are showing me a photograph 
of your mother who died of cancer in the same hospital 
you were born in, bones poking through papery sheets, 
her stomach a hollow bowl you could drink from. 
and you are undressing me in the middle of your cold kitchen. 
and you are undressing me trembling as a rabbit caught wild 
in the long grass of the graveyard near town. 
(we are hidden by windows grey with frost, 
pale lacy ferns pressed onto the glass.) 
and you are kissing goosebumps across my collar bone. 
and you are dragging me, dead-heavy and drenched, 
from the lake you showed me how to fish in, back to shore. 
a slender presence 
in the hot 
late afternoon i read you, vergil, 
in my heart, your book not in my hands, 
amid crowds in the reflective 
oven of cement—crowds half naked 
as nymphs in a blue and ochre 
mosaic fountain basin, 
but sweating, suffering, 
rejoicing in the excuse for nudity, 
ignoring as much as may be 
their ugliness, paining for relief. 
without knowing it, they were existing 
in your rome. everywhere in my world, 
my today, is in your rome. 
here, as there, white gray slabs 
milled from nature 
clad every side except the sky 
and redouble the sun, 
making it evil. but in your day, everywhere 
but that one city—prophet of my world 
all one city—was vineyard and field, 
a vista waving, oak and vine, 
the herd and hive, the many 
dark forests, homes 
of hamadryads, abductions—stories— 
monsters—the boar, the snake. . . 
dark forests and the fountain-like 
clear lament always there 
for the naked dead girl and boy. 
but today is concrete and this summer 
not many read you on bench or bus 
and i too will soon go back 
to the songs of my time. you 
are dispersed 
in the humid atmosphere like a snowflake 
that fell in the wrong season and disappeared 
before it touched the ground. your voice 
from beauty to horror, 
resurrection to death, 
makes whatever contribution to this july 
a snowflake left over from early spring can make, 
whatever irrigation it is that flows 
to cracked meadows 
from the light snow that fell in a boy's gaze 
ages ago one may at mediolanum. 
snapshot of my father 
last night i dreamt of black seagulls 
and shapeshifting. 
man, woman, god, animal— 
and then grief, in the shape of a conversation 
between my father and a young waiter, 
strangers, both from dar es salaam, 
bonding over takeout orders and all of those buildings, 
so many new buildings, 
rising from the dregs of a backyard, a garden, 
a seven-shilling cinema, a mother's grave. 
after waking, i could taste swahili, 
while the floating pedals of my father's old bicycle 
whirred in my head 
like cogs, madly turning, fragmenting my life 
into questions: what am i? over and over again, 
what am i? 
earlier that day 
before the birds and the gashes, 
before the remnants of an old conversation, 
my father pulled up next to the fence, 
rolled down his car window and said, "i quit religion." 
my father, with the dark green qur'an 
that radiates in my memory, 
the man who ends every conversation 
with a prayer. 
here it is. a moment cut open, and a life 
reaching for heaven in the split seam, 
finding nothing, just air shapeshifting into air. 
steep steps toward home 
sun. sun laminated onto snow 
and sealed by wind. hardcover. 
before this, though, knee-deep 
slog through soft stuff. the heart 
jumps into the ears, a pulse 
in the eyelids begging no more, 
no more as the throat sores from 
so much laboured breath. 
back to sun. back to leaning 
into the steep of this hill. wind 
tries keeping you down, gravity 
tries keeping you down. aching 
knees and back and bones trying 
to keep you down. a body defied 
by its driver, by a mind's stubborn 
fix not to fail. wondering 
how much a heart can take before 
it bursts its walls, if there's any virtue 
in dying while doing what you love. 
agh, enough! enough of this 
self-punity, enough of this tough 
talk of rock and wind, so much 
effort just to hide in plain sight. 
then, i'm there. so close i could 
walk out onto air, brush the snow 
off guernsey island and sit. legs 
kicking out over the gulf, i blow 
a kiss to the magdalens, peer around 
anticosti to catch a glimpse 
of gulls in gaspé bay. lazy, 
in love with being alone up here, 
i yawn and stretch my arms wide 
as a smile, barely notice when 
i prick my finger on long point. 
seeing, then, that my windproof 
coat is the same colour as the ocean, 
as the sky, as all the things we never 
said when we should have and all this 
inexhaustible blue wears me down. 
now i'm gasping and the wind 
is dragging your name from my lips 
in heaves and sobs and i'm somehow 
in the driver's seat, engine running, 
heat on bust drying salt and snot against 
my skin. dumb with grief, finding myself 
mumbling we tried, we tried, into the hot, 
thick emptiness of a rental car. 
sundays, mornings 
1 
vast spread of stripe—white sky and sky-blue—north light  on the bed, coffee, oranges, nuts and fruit, breakfast  together and the freedom to pull the shades off the windows,  expose the wide world percolating springish beyond the pane.  he laughs a little, skeptic always, spills coffee on the sheet, and the cat, affronted, leaves for the under-bed, the dark, dusty world we created and skirt, averting our eyes for comfort. the day is open,  vast and unsung, we haven't even risen except to tend to our bodies, talk to the children, then return to this haven. the day is wide open and about to spoil—we will rise too late, won't eat properly,  there are chores, the dishes, the miles of dog shit uncovered  by the chinook in the night to deal with—we will die and wither and this i know below the words in my book, under the laughter,  the duvet, like a bruise in my thigh. the sky threatens rain,  the weather too mild not to mean it. 
2 
death doesn't deserve him. what use has death  for the strength in his arms, the breadth of his knowledge?  his sigh of pleasure, sinking into the bed  at the end of the day with wooden boat and me—divinity  is in these smaller things: clean sheets, a sip of water, his foot  finding mine, allowing my iced toes safe harbour,  warming them after the arctic winter of my side of the bed.  i won't presume to imagine what stokes that stove—the passions  he keeps safe under the surface, his grievings, his moans—loneliness 
is a given in the unbridgeable space between us all, but he seems unbothered; 
his is a quiet storm: no flash-floods, no landslides or earthquakes due to old grievances. his stillness, serious, settles us,  ending the winter with rain. road dust and gravel wet  on the highway shoulders: nonetheless no mercy for windshields pocked and cracked from rocks spat from tires of others. 
3 
we agreed on death but we made no promises for an afterlife.  be careful, only, and i love you. paradise is and isn't  this perishing earth, ravaged by us, revered  by us and ours. we walk the dog through the greenbelt, boughs  hiding us from the sky, ice still scuttled in the shade, and wonder:  does he see the grouse high-stepping slowly through brush,  the same colour as the dapple of sun on last year's leaves? except  it startles and bursts sky-ward through the trees. the dog  goes berserk, and we crack up. yes, this is paradise—this forest path scented with fir needles and damp, fungus and defrosted shit— we anticipate loss and are in it, feasting while the forest falls, tree 
by tree, sleeping while the world bursts into life. love is the mother of death. 
4 
the outside is greater than the inside—the literal trees and woods, the rivers, bogs, swamps, wetlands, tundra, sea, all greater than i and he no matter where or how we lay or lived or wished. all of it, greater 
but not better than our innards, simmering away unsaid—cysts and memories 
and heart murmurs, kisses, blow jobs from girls with braces,  the lick of wind up a bare torso on a moonlit beach,  the water spread out like black forever— 
greater than what we want or wanted: hope, purpose, a blind  commitment 
to tomorrow's wonderland. there are moose on the lakes above the falls who live whole lives without our interference—huge males  with racks so heavy their heads hang down to the weeds. 
huge mammals with pungent fur, with desire, malaise, yellowed whites of eyes 
and mats and fleas and tumours and maggots, all against the great expanse of sky reflected on perfectly still water, all greater  than what we know, day-to-day, and what we will earn as a reward for our humility—the world's indifferent gorgeous blue. 
5 
he says, the hound on his chest on the chesterfield,  "i am a monkey and he is a wolf." we laugh,  but this simplicity is true: outside the womb  is the jungle, the unforgiving plains, and we are at odds with fondness 
and time immemorial. the skin we wear over our wilderness is a veil 
between this world and the other, this truth and each other,  between our skins' heat and sweat, our bodies' semen and tears— the high ozone smell of love. he says a lot of things—  some to me, some to the dog.  desire is living wolf and owl, human  in the chaos of our own construction, bad as it may be  or good, depending on how you tell it— 
with wings or no wings at all. 
6 
he says, "i'll make that chicken into curry for supper,"  or something equally mundane but full of promise. he doesn't mean we'll last forever, or that joy, sticking around, won't become  brackish, lacking lustre. from him and me and our children 
and the dog and cats and from northern flickers leaping from the grass 
to the safety of the weeping birch, all of this comes joy and love,  the fulfillment of desire. i don't make him accountable for all—  just most, just us, this tender moment and that, the way  he can always get the knot out of yarn or fishing line, the way  i turn to him for touch to ground me, as if i were leaping skyward. he's my tree. and he, just by being, seeing, saying it out loud  makes the world safe for boys and girls who come to him  for harbour, a word, a joke, a way to see the world anew, and i  bask. nothing else. safe among the leaves. 
7 
we live erring and afraid, even as we fear death, and court it,  we live, side by side, on the riot of the earth. we live  wanting and getting, making it count, taste by taste, touching, greedy for the grease of supper, and all the afterwards.  i am the mother of wonder. sweet saskatoons  ripen and litter the greenbelt with promise, their seeds 
seeping into the dirt. mountain ash berries will ferment on the branch 
and we will marvel at evening grosbeaks drunk from feasting,  come february, filling the tree with sound: scarlet, brown,  flurries of wing and flick of tails. we are and will be dumbfounded, ensconced behind the window in our bed, safe under duvets  awaiting darkness, winter, death, living all of it  because, lucky, it's what we get. 
taxi drivers' therapy 
kolkata's klaxons corrode the wiring in 
your skull: a child, you watched the brahmin 
sacrifice a goat at kali temple, your bare feet 
were islands in its blood. ma had whispered 
this is how we cleanse our hearts, but you can't 
recall what this means. now you're hanging 
a bare foot from your taxi window, blistered 
toes antennae to scan the city for her voice. 
instead of ma's eyes, you dream of two black 
crows sharing a cigarette on an awning— 
they light another, alight together for 
wherever crows go when outside of human 
experience. your side-mirror sniffs at a woman's 
silken sari; the writing on the mirror states 
summer is a time for reveries. in the alley, people 
are moving through each other, not ghosts, 
but so alive their skin's a porous border. 
