rapidly cruising or lying on the air there is a bird 
that realizes rasselas’s friend’s project 
of wings uniting levity with strength. this 
hell-diver, frigate-bird, hurricane- 
bird; unless swift is the proper word 
for him, the storm omen when 
he flies close to the waves, should be seen 
fishing, although oftener 
he appears to prefer 
to take, on the wing, from industrious cruder-winged species 
the fish they have caught, and is seldom successless. 
a marvel of grace, no matter how fast his 
victim may fly or how often may 
turn, the dishonest pelican’s ease 
in pursuit, bears him away 
with the fish that the badgered bird drops. 
a kind of superlative 
swallow, that likes to live 
on food caught while flying, he is not a pelican. the toe 
with slight web, air-boned body, and very long wings 
with the spread of a swan’s—duplicating a 
bow-string as he floats overhead—feel 
the changing v-shaped scissor swallow- 
tail direct the rigid keel. 
and steering beak to windward always, 
the fleetest foremost fairy 
among birds, outflies the 
aeroplane which cannot flap its wings nor alter any quill- 
tip. for him, the feeling in a hand, in fins, is 
in his unbent downbent crafty oar. with him 
other pelicans aimlessly soar 
as he does; separating, until 
not flapping they rise once more, 
closing in without looking and move 
outward again to the top 
of the circle and stop 
and blow back, allowing the wind to reverse their direction. 
this is not the stalwart swan that can ferry the 
woodcutter’s two children home; no. make hay; keep 
the shop; i have one sheep; were a less 
limber animal’s mottoes. this one 
finds sticks for the swan’s-down dress 
of his child to rest upon and would 
not know gretel from hänsel. 
as impassioned handel— 
meant for a lawyer and a masculine german domestic 
career—clandestinely studied the harpsichord 
and never was known to have fallen in love, 
the unconfiding frigate-bird hides 
in the height and in the majestic 
display of his art. he glides 
a hundred feet or quivers about 
as charred paper behaves—full 
of feints; and an eagle 
of vigilance, earns the term aquiline; keeping at a height 
so great the feathers look black and the beak does not 
show. it is not retreat but exclusion from 
which he looks down and observes what went 
secretly, as it thought, out of sight 
among dense jungle plants. sent 
ahead of the rest, there goes the true 
knight in his jointed coat that 
covers all but his bat 
ears; a-trot, with stiff pig gait—our tame armadillo, loosed by 
his master and as pleased as a dog. beside the 
spattered blood—that orchid which the native fears— 
the fer-de-lance lies sleeping; centaur- 
like, this harmful couple’s amity 
is apropos. a jaguar 
and crocodile are fighting. sharp-shinned 
hawks and peacock-freckled small 
cats, like the literal 
merry-go-round, come wandering within the circular view 
of the high bird for whom from the air they are ants 
keeping house all their lives in the crack of a 
crag with no view from the top. and here, 
unlikely animals learning to 
dance, crouch on two steeds that rear 
behind a leopard with a frantic 
face, tamed by an artemis 
who wears a dress like his, 
and hampering haymaker’s hat. festina lente. be gay 
civilly. how so? "if i do well i am blessed 
whether any bless me or not, and if i do 
ill i am cursed." we watch the moon rise 
on the susquehanna. in his way 
this most romantic bird, flies 
to a more mundane place, the mangrove 
swamp, to sleep. he wastes the moon. 
but he, and others, soon 
rise from the bough, and though flying are able to foil the tired 
moment of danger, that lays on heart and lungs the 
weight of the python that crushes to powder. 
the tune’s illiterate footsteps fail; 
the steam hacks are not to be admired. 
these, unturbulent, avail 
themselves of turbulence to fly—pleased 
with the faint wind’s varyings, 
on which to spread fixed wings. 
the reticent lugubrious ragged immense minuet 
descending to leeward, ascending to windward 
again without flapping, in what seems to be 
a way of resting, are now nearer, 
but as seemingly bodiless yet 
as they were. theirs are somber 
quills for so wide and lightboned a bird 
as the frigate pelican 
of the caribbean. 
