but now it is she who pauses, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
a stillness greatens, in which 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
— from "the writer" by richard wilbur 
i'm the girl behind the door in richard wilbur's poem, 
typing in solitude. confinement frees me 
from my family. the sentences i make are blades, 
the brash clatter of the keys a song: i'm getting out. 
wilbur invented this scene of writing: the daughter, 
the typing, the shut door, the linden that tosses 
against the window, the bird as metaphor, his own paused 
self interpreting her keystrokes as a kind of war. 
what does he know of her writing and its causes? 
but now it is she who pauses 
to question my intrusion in her home. how can i compare 
myself to her? no. i'm the parent, listening on the stair 
to the rhythms that my daughter makes. i long 
to hold her captive in the house of words i've built 
to keep her safe. instead, i must open the casement, 
brace myself for the coming, necessary rupture. 
it arrives with all the breathless grace and power 
of the prisoner released. i watch her as she turns 
away from me and strides into her future, 
as if to reject my thought and its easy figure. 
i'm the bird in the room, the frightened starling 
fluttering hard against the window glass. wild, 
he called me, sleek and iridescent. yes. i fled too early 
from my parents' house and recognized too late 
that grief would lodge like fire in my throat, 
that i'd be haunted and bewitched 
and typing hard through every night. and now, 
in a house of books, with neither parents nor child, 
where the doors lock, and the clock ticks, 
a stillness greatens, in which 
i'm only the reader of this poem. it cuts me twice, 
with its escaping and its letting go. this morning 
news of wilbur's death comes hard in the frozen 
dark, and i reread "the writer," a poem in which 
i've lived for forty years, as i live in this house— 
alone and typing, sometimes drinking, 
while the stillness swells in the cold air, filling 
the empty rooms until there's no sound anywhere. 
only winter closing in, and the mercury sinking. 
the whole house seems to be thinking. 
