dürer would have seen a reason for living 
in a town like this, with eight stranded whales 
to look at; with the sweet sea air coming into your house 
on a fine day, from water etched 
with waves as formal as the scales 
on a fish. 
one by one, in two’s, in three’s, the seagulls keep 
flying back and forth over the town clock, 
or sailing around the lighthouse without moving the wings— 
rising steadily with a slight 
quiver of the body—or flock 
mewing where 
a sea the purple of the peacock’s neck is 
paled to greenish azure as dürer changed 
the pine green of the tyrol to peacock blue and guinea 
grey. you can see a twenty-five 
pound lobster; and fishnets arranged 
to dry. the 
whirlwind fifeanddrum of the storm bends the salt 
marsh grass, disturbs stars in the sky and the 
star on the steeple; it is a privilege to see so 
much confusion. disguised by what 
might seem austerity, the seaside 
flowers and 
trees are favored by the fog so that you have 
the tropics at first hand: the trumpet-vine, 
fox-glove, giant snap-dragon, a salpiglossis that has 
spots and stripes; morning-glories, gourds, 
or moon-vines trained on fishing-twine 
at the back 
door; cat-tails, flags, blueberries and spiderwort, 
striped grass, lichens, sunflowers, asters, daisies— 
the yellow and the crab-claw blue ones with green bracts—toad-plant, 
petunias, ferns; pink lilies, blue 
ones, tigers; poppies; black sweet-peas. 
the climate 
is not right for the banyan, frangipani, the 
jack-fruit tree; nor for exotic serpent 
life. ring lizard and snake-skin for the foot if you see fit, 
but here they’ve cats not cobras to 
keep down the rats. the diffident 
little newt 
with white pin-dots on black horizontal spaced 
out bands lives here; yet there is nothing that 
ambition can buy or take away. the college student 
named ambrose sits on the hill-side 
with his not-native books and hat 
and sees boats 
at sea progress white and rigid as if in 
a groove. liking an elegance of which 
the source is not bravado, he knows by heart the antique 
sugar-bowl shaped summer-house of 
interlacing slats, and the pitch 
of the church 
spire, not true, from which a man in scarlet lets 
down a rope as a spider spins a thread; 
he might be part of a novel, but on the sidewalk a 
sign says c. j. poole, steeple-jack, 
in black and white; and one in red 
and white says 
danger. the church portico has four fluted 
columns, each a single piece of stone, made 
modester by white-wash. this would be a fit haven for 
waifs, children, animals, prisoners, 
and presidents who have repaid 
sin-driven 
senators by not thinking about them. there 
are a school-house, a post-office in a 
store, fish-houses, hen-houses, a three-masted schooner on 
the stocks. the hero, the student, 
the steeple-jack, each in his way, 
is at home. 
it could not be dangerous to be living 
in a town like this, of simple people, 
who have a steeple-jack placing danger signs by the church 
while he is gilding the solidpointed 
star, which on a steeple 
stands for hope. 
