changing horses frequently, one day 
out i had left red river in my rear, but 
before me lay an            country, 
unless i veered from my course and went 
through the chickasaw nation. out to- 
ward bear canyon, where the land to the 
north rose brokenly to the mountains, 
luck found the bleak stretches of which 
he had dreamed that night on the ob- 
servation platform of a train speeding 
through the night in north dakota,—a 
great white wilderness unsheltered by 
friendly forests,      save by 
wild things that moved stealthily across 
its windswept ridges. this done, they 
would lead the ship to an 
part of the shore, beach her, and scatter 
over the mainland, each with his share 
of the booty. how lonely i felt, in that 
vast      bush! except for a 
very few places on the ouleout, and 
the iroquois towns, the region was 
. this was no country for 
people to live in, and so far as she could 
see it was indeed      . but for the 
lazy columns of blue smoke curling up 
from the pinyons the place would have 
seemed      . it appeared to be 
a dry,      forest. in the vivid 
sunlight and perfect silence, it had a new, 
look, as if the carpenters and 
painters had just left it. it was in vain that 
those on board made remonstrances and 
entreaties, and represented the horrors 
of abandoning men upon a sterile and 
island; the sturdy captain 
was 
inflexible. the herbage is parched and 
withered; the brooks and streams are 
dried up; the buffalo, the elk and the deer 
have wandered to distant parts, keeping 
within the verge of expiring verdure, and 
leaving behind them a vast 
solitude, seamed by ravines, the beds of 
former torrents, but now serving only 
to tantalize and increase the thirst of the 
traveller. it kept on its course through a 
vast wilderness of silent and apparently 
mountains, without a savage 
wigwam upon its banks, or bark upon 
its waters. they were at a loss what route 
to take, and how far they were from the 
ultimate place of their destination, nor 
could they meet in these 
wilds with any human being to give them 
information. they forded butte creek, 
and, crossing the well-travelled trail 
which follows down to drybone, turned 
their faces toward the 
country that began immediately, as the 
ocean begins off a sandy shore. 
