before sight, we imagine 
that while they go out in search 
of god 
we stay in and become god, 
become: curiosity, 
whose soul is a nuclear battery 
because she'll pulverize martian rock 
and test for organic molecules 
in her lab within a lab within 
a lab. she doesn't need to know our fears 
so far too grand for ontology, reckoning. 
did you not land with your rocket behind 
you, hope beyond hope on the tip of your rope 
with the kindness of antigravity slowing you down, 
you, before me, metal and earthen. but i am here to 
confirm or deny, the millions of small 
things that seven minutes of success were hinged upon 
when i was little more than idea and research, 
in the hypnotic gestures of flame and bunsen burner, 
and into parachute 
no one foresaw, the bag of rags at the end 
of the tunnel—all memory now, 
this paraclete. 
where else is a pocket 
of air more deadly than the atomic bomb? 
would this only happen on earth? 
has mars run out of tolerance for the minutiae 
of air pockets, fingerprints and worry? 
aggregates of metal, curiosity 
and her clues to calm our fears for what's coming. 
mars and her epic storms, her gargantuan 
volcanoes have long ceased their trembling, 
her crazy flooded planes, frozen and in cinema. 
martian life now earth and revelation's phases: 
earth problem, not mars problem. 
but why 
should i unravel over all this remembering? 
great thing about landing 
is that i've arrived 
at your service, at your sand, at your valley 
and unsentimental magma. 
before me screams planes like mojave desert, waikiki, nagasaki, 
nothing too strange to keep curiosity off course. 
even though the viking missions found no conclusive pulse 
and we declared you dead, o mars, 
never mind that we named your heights and depths 
from orbit. and from your spheres of minerals 
where oceans once roared—we've learned little 
of your lenience for empire. 
forgive us what spirit uncovered in the silica of your ancient hot springs. 
ah, yes, we've come back home. 
phoenix told us we inherited the numberless 
stories of your hydraulic pathologies 
but i am curiosity. if i kill the bitch right, 
she'll take us deeper and convince us to send earthlings 
to set up earth colonies on your deserts. they won't ever 
come back, but that's not so bad when we trade in 
the grander scheme. 
as though the colonials, the tribe traders 
and all the pharaonic masquerades of gone times 
were not fair threat. that we won't know the depth 
of our homeward seas 
is nothing when 
the sun's still got our backs. 
and while waters still vaporize before us 
curiosity will keep on until the organic secrets 
of that martian puzzle become as household to us 
as carbon. oxygen wasn't the only disaster to befall earth, 
to bless her with life. 
apollo drilled on the moon and got stuck 
and the harder we've drilled down here 
the more we've loosened our screws. 
perhaps there'll be no one left to give 
a damn about the death of our privates 
unless we prove ourselves enigmas, 
the alien we think we know is the alien we only dream 
up starting from the bottom 
of the curious. 
we wake and die through 
the crowns and thorns and craned chapters, 
we move too quick for understanding. 
still, through the decades we predict, 
curiosity confirms the cold-slain dust. 
then come her conches blown 
in the hard-won postcards travelling 
on space dust faster than a bullet 
to say: 
hey, 
i'm here. i safe. wish you were here. 
see gale crater, mount sharp, just as you've said. 
come bask with me in the wonders of a martian. good afternoon, 
you of flowering faith. set sail for home, 
because we will all wear the consequences of this choice. 
and you never should have said 
goodbye. 
