the boat burns in the windless night, its fire's 
dark light threading in from the middle distance 
over waveless water, black and slick 
as tarmac after rain. the endless wick 
of the city mauves the underbelly 
of sky beyond, the boat burning slowly 
northward on the flood, smoke rust and bruise- 
black billowing off the flames. 
forced to choose 
i'd torch it down and take the money too. 
one too many seasons in the secession 
of seasons siphoning off the last lifeblood of a sea sick with eutrophication 
till its death and the debt hone a knife 
on the wind, course with self-scorn and blame – 
the match struck and set, i'd swim from the flame. 
unseasonable snows blanket the windfalls 
the branches, the timbers that once were 
joist, beam and strapping here. 
sappho's 
sweetapple, efflorescent in the unexpected 
the unaccustomed white, perches bird- 
like in song, as sunrays cloud-split; word 
as though word were reborn, resurrected. 
the weave – what's connected unequivocally 
– unequivocally unraveling 
on arctic outflows; 
the disparity of what was given and what we chose. 
and choose: 
i'll climb the ashen limbs 
above this abandoned roofline as the west sky dims, 
take that sweetness in as the autumn 
and dusk transpose. 
in the clear morning calm, in the quiet 
fear, the first whisper of what blood- 
light piercing grey cloud presages 
in the charged air: the wire filament 
surging spine, the sense: as the cold moon 
siphons the tide, inside, beyond the cage 
reason rages against receiving, this world. 
i swear i collapsed on the float and unfurled 
like a flag in the fast-rising wind. and lay, 
bare as beach-washed bone, in the fray 
we've sewn, torn, and re-sewn… 
then rose, and turned my heart towards home: 
your heart: from the gathering storm. where 
to begin, without ending, love? i love you. there. 
my saw then silent the clearing reclaimed 
the quiet it was as forest before i came, 
engine in hand, orchard and house-site 
in mind. birdsong and a warm june rain 
fell from and upon trees still standing 
and for a time – a blue heron landing 
atop the high fir over the iron pin – 
i felt as i had as a child, before this 
question of whether even to try is ignis 
fatuus, when living and being in 
the world simply was, not an idea 
to be written of and discussed. off the sea 
a gust washed over broad maples, slanting rain, 
and i set down to file the chain. 
it is the world beyond weeping you walk through 
its doors its wide fields with fading light 
beneath the charred pines the delicate blue 
veins, the diagnoses, the blinding white 
machines. having learnt, finally, to forgive? 
this goddamn dissentious blood. this brain: 
all of life's living just learning to live: 
when water falling finally sounds it's no longer rain. 
in time there will be pain and it will be 
all i can do to rise and let the wind 
through an open window, the distant sea 
singing you through. each night, each end 
brings what binds us: our love, and fear. 
it is enough, each day, to have been here. 
